OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE HISTORY OF LINGUISTICS Edited by KEITH ALLAN

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi C H A P T E R THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE SALIKOKO S MUFWENE 1 1 1 NTRODUCTION Although ‘language evolution’ is perhaps more commonly used in linguistics than ‘evolution of language’, I stick in this chapter to the latter term, which focuses more specifically on the phylogenetic emergence of language. The former, which has prompted some linguists such as Croft (2008) to speak of ‘evolutionary linguistics’, appliesalsotochangesundergonebyindividuallanguagesoverthepast6,000yearsof documentaryhistory,includingstructuralchanges,languagespeciation,andlanguage birthanddeath.Therearecertainlyadvantagesinusingthebroaderterm,especiallyto uniformitarians who argue that some of the same evolutionary mechanisms are involvedinboththephylogeneticandthehistoricalperiodsofevolution.Forinstance, natural selection driven by particular ecological pressures putatively applies in both periods,andsocialnormsemergebythesameprincipleofthe‘invisiblehand’or‘self- organization’ (e.g. Hurford 2006, Mufwene 2008). However, I focus here only phylo- geneticevolution. InthischapterIprovideaselectivehistory,sinceantiquity,ofthiscomplexbutstill largelyspeculativetopicwhich,overthepasttwodecadesalone,haspromptednumer- ous publications and has aroused much controversy among linguists and informative exchanges between them, primatologists, psycholinguists, anthropologists, neuro- linguists, evolutionary biologists, paleontologists, and computational linguists. This 1 IwrotethischapterwhileIwasafellowattheCollegiumdeLyon,from15Sept.2010to15July2011. IamverygratefultotheInstituteanditsadministrativestaffforthefinancialandlogisticsupportthat enabledmetopursuemyresearchonthephylogeneticemergenceoflanguage.Iamalsoindebtedto KeithAllan,BarbaraDavis,PaulKeyser,andIoanaChitoranforconstructivecommentsonmyfirst draft.Iamaloneresponsibleforalltheremainingshortcomings.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 14 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE intellectualengagementhasbeeninsharpcontrastwithmostofthetwentiethcentury, during which linguists appear to have abided by the the Société de Linguistique de Paris’ 1866 ban on discussing the subject at its meetings. It appears also to have resurrected several positions by—and controversies among—especially eighteenth- and nineteenth-century European philosophers and philologists. I show below that thedifferencesbetweenthetwoperiodslieespeciallyinthestrongerempiricalfounda- tionsofsomerecenthypotheses,andintherealizationbytheirauthorsoftheneedfor interdisciplinaryscholarship. Mydiscussionisorganizedaroundthefollowingquestions(whichdonotnecessarily determinethesectionstructureofthechapter): 1. WaslanguagegiventohumansbyGodordiditemergebyDarwinianevolution? 2. From a phylogenetic perspective, did language emerge abruptly or gradually? If theemergenceoflanguagewasprotracted,whatplausibleintermediatestagescan be posited and what would count as evidence for positing them? Assuming that thestructureofmodernlanguagesismodular,wouldgradualevolutionapplyto any of the modules, only to some of them, or only to the overall architecture? What is the probable time of the emergence of the first real ancestor of modern language? 3. DoespossessingLanguage,thenon-individuatedconstructassociatedexclusively with humans, presuppose monogenesis or does it allow for polygenesis? How consistentiseitherpositionwithpaleontologicalevidenceabouttheevolutionof the Homo genus? How did linguistic diversity start? Assuming Darwinian (vari- ational rather than transformational) evolution, can monogenesis account for typologicalvariationasplausiblyaspolygenesis? 4. What is the chronological relationship between communication and language? Whatlightdoesthisdistinctionshedontherelationbetweensign(ed)andspoken language?Didsomeofourhomininancestorscommunicatebymeansofape-like vocalizations and gestures? If so, how can we account for the transition from themtophoneticandsignedlanguages?Andhowcanweaccountforthefactthat modernhumanshavefavouredspeakingoversigning?Assumingthatlanguageis acommunicationtechnology,towhatextentaresomeofthestructuralproperties of languages consequences of the linearity imposed by the phonic and signing devicesusedintheirarchitecture? 5. Istheevolutionoflanguagemorebiologicalthancultural?Orisittheotherway around,orequallyboth?Arelanguagesasculturalartifactsdeliberateinventions or emergent phenomena? Who are the agents in the emergence of language: individualsorpopulations,orboth? 6. What is the relationship between language and thought? Did these entities co-evolveordidonecausetheother? 7. Istheresuchathingas‘languageorgan’or‘biologicalendowmentforlanguage’? How can it be characterized relative to modern humans’ anatomical and/or

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE mental makeups? What are the anatomical, mental, and social factors that facilitatedtheemergenceoflanguage? 8. Canwelearnsomethingabouttheevolutionoflanguagefromhistoricallanguage change, especially from the emergence of creoles and pidgins? Can we learn something from child language and/or from home sign language? And what can be learned from ‘linguistic apes’? Does it make sense to characterize these particularcommunicative‘systems’asfossilsofthehumanprotolanguage(cf.e.g. Bickerton1990)?Inthesamevein,whatcanmodellingcontributetounderstand- ing the evolution of language. This is definitely the kind of thing that scholars could not do before the twentieth century; it is important to assess its heuristic significance. AsnotedbyKirby(2007),thesubjectmatteroftheoriginsandevolutionoflanguageis verycomplex.Itliesattheintersectionofseveralacademicdisciplinesandrequiresan interdisciplinary approach. I have listed all the above questions, which are still but a subsetofthelargerrangeofquestionsonecanaddressinabook,sothatthereadermay empathize with the daunting task I have accepted in writing this synopsis, and appreciate the synthetic approach I adopt in focusing on noteworthy positions and issues, aiming at the big picture. Unfortunately, this strategy entails omitting many equally relevant references, aside from forcing me to be topically selective. The positions of the scholars I discuss may not even be presented in their entirety, due largely to space limitations. More interested readers are encouraged to read recent publications such as Fitch (2010) and Hombert and Lenclud (in press) for comple- mentaryand/oralternativeaccounts.Imustalsoapologizeforfocusingexclusivelyon Westernscholarship,whichreflectsmyembarrassingignoranceoftheothertraditions. Iwillseekno excuseforthefactthatEuropeancolonialexpansion,whichhasshaped meintellectually,hasgenerallydownplayedwhatwecouldbelearningfromtheother scholarlytraditions. . A H S ISTORICAL YNOPSIS Speculationsabouttheoriginsoflanguageandlinguisticdiversitydatefromfarbackin the history of mankind. Among the most cited cases is the book of Genesis, in the Judeo-Christian Bible. After God created Adam, He reportedly gave him authority to name every being that was in the Garden of Eden. Putatively, God and Adam spoke somelanguage,theoriginallanguage,whichsomescholarshaveclaimedtobeHebrew, theoriginallanguageofBible.AdamnamedeveryentityGodwantedhimtoknow;and hiswifeanddescendantsaccordinglylearnedthenameshehadinvented. Althoughthestorysuggeststheoriginofnamingconventions,itsaysnothingabout whether Adam named only entities or also actions and states. In any case, it suggests

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 16 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE thatitwasnecessaryforAdam’swifeanddescendantstolearnthesamevocabularyto facilitatesuccessfulcommunication. Up to the eighteenth century, reflecting the impact of Christianity, pre-modern Western philosophers and philologists typically maintained that language was given tomankind,orthathumanswereendowedwithlanguageupontheircreation.Assum- ingthatEve,whowasreportedlycreatedfromAdam’srib,wasequallyendowedwith (a capacity for) language, the rest was a simple history of learning the original vocabulary or language. Changes needed historical accounts, grounded in natural disasters,inpopulationdispersals,andinlearningwithmodification,towhichIreturn below. ThebookofGenesisalsodealswiththeoriginoflinguisticdiversity,inthemythof theTowerofBabel(11:5–8),inwhichthemultitudeoflanguagesistreatedasaformof punishment from God. According to the myth, the human population had already increasedsubstantially,generationsaftertheGreatDelugeintheNoah’sArkstory.To avoid being scattered around the world, they built a city with a tower tall enough to reachtheheavens,thedwellingofGod.Thetowerapparentlyviolatedthepopulation structuresetupatthecreationofAdamandEve.Godbroughtthemdown(according tosomeversions,Healsodestroyedthetower),dispersedthemaroundtheworld,and confounded them by making them speak in mutually unintelligible ways. Putatively, this is how linguistic diversity began. The story suggests that sharing the same language fosters collaboration, contrary to some of the modern Darwinian thinking thatjointattentionandcooperation,ratherthancompetition,facilitatedtheemergence oflanguage(seee.g.Tomasello2008). Anotherstoryoftenreportedinlinguisticsisthefollowing: According to Herodotus (Histories 2.2) Pharaoh Psammetichus I [also known as Psamtik, of the 26th dynasty, seventh century bc] wanted to determine the oldest nationandestablishtheworld’soriginallanguage.Forthispurpose,heorderedtwo childrentoberearedbyashepherd,forbiddinghimtoletthemhearasingleword, and charging him to report the children’s first utterance. After two years, the shepherd reported that on entering their chamber, the children came up to him, extending their hands, calling bekos. Upon enquiry, the pharaoh discovered that thiswasthePhrygian wordfor‘wheatbread’,afterwhichtheEgyptians conceded thatthePhrygiannationwasolderthantheirs.(Wikipedia,Jan.2011) The story may be interpreted to suggest monogenesis, according to which a single languagewastheultimateancestorofallmodernlanguages.Thiswouldcorrespondto a protolanguage, such as proto-Bantu or proto-Indo-European, in genetic linguistics. However, this is not the theme we find in Plato’s Cratylus, which focuses on how the HombertandLenclud(inpress)identifyanother,lesswell-recalledaccountalsofromthebook ofGenesis.GodreportedlytoldNoahandhischildrentobefecundandpopulatetheworld. Subsequently,thedescendantsofSem,Cham,andJaphetspreadallovertheworldandbuiltnations wheretheyspokedifferentlanguages.Hereonealsofindsanearly,ifnottheearliest,versionofthe assumptionthateverynationmustbeidentifiedthroughthelanguagespokenbyitspopulation.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE firstwordsemerged(inGreek).Accordingtothedialoguewithtwodisciples,Cratylus and Hermogenes, Socrates (the teacher and Plato’s mouthpiece) claims that names originally captured the essence of the entities they denote; transmission from gener- ation to generation has affected their transparency, making them (rather) opaque, reducing them to conventional, arbitrary signs. Opaqueness is accordingly more obvious in words borrowed from other languages, then considered ‘barbarous,’ espe- cially since their roots are harder to trace. Socrates’ comparison of the putative initialbaptismalpractice withtheworkof apainter makeshisaccount aprecursorof modern synesthetic approach, as he associates particular sounds with specific mean- ings. He thus anticipated some eighteenth- and nineteenth-century philologists who sawtheoriginsoflanguagein‘naturalsounds’producedbyanimalsandotherentities innature. Anticipating Johann Gottfried Herder, Socrates rejects the hypothesis that names haddivineoriginsbecause,accordingtohim,theyaresoimperfectthattheycouldnot havebeenmadebythegods.TheCratylusisalsooneoftheearliestworksthatassociate languagechangewithimperfectlearningandlanguagecontact.Thelatterphenomenon complicatestheevolutionarytrajectoriesofparticularlanguages,which,incontempor- arymetalanguage,neednotbeconsideredasunilinear. Recently, the significance of population movements and language contacts in the evolutionanddiversificationoflanguageshasbeenunderscoredespeciallybyCavalli- Sforza (2000). Assuming that the exodus of Homo sapiens sapiens out of East Africa was protracted, he argues that some of the later migrant populations came in contact withearlierones.Thoughhesaysnothingaboutmonogenesisvspolygenesis,theidea appearstobethattheoriginallanguagechangedashumanpopulationsmigratedaway fromthehomeland.Latercontactsbetweenthedispersingpopulationsproducedeven morechanges.Nomorereasonotherthanpopulationdispersalisgivenforthechange, whichisalsoproblematicintypicalaccountsofspeciationinlanguagefamiliessuchas BantuandIndo-European. Thedominanttrendingeneticlinguistics,whichinspiredCavalli-Sforza(2000)buthad beendisputedbyTrubetzkoy(1939),hasindeedbeenformonogenesis,positingaproto- languagefromwhichallthemembersofalanguagefamilycanbederived.Thisaccountof the evolution of language has also been adopted in particular by Ruhlen (1994), who attempted to reconstruct the ultimate phylogenetic protolanguage since Homo sapiens, on the model of proto-Indo-European or proto-Bantu. This ‘protolanguage,’ identified by some as ‘proto-world,’ should not be confused with the ‘protolanguage’ (without a hyphen)positedbyBickerton(e.g.1990)anddiscussedbelow. Writing in the first century bc, the Roman poet and philosopher Titus Lucretius CarusquestionedoneparticularbrandofmonogenesisthatisnotnecessarilyAdamic: [...] to think that one individual then distributed names to things and that humans learned the first words from him is absurd. For why would he be able to markeverythingwithutterancesandemitdifferentsoundsofthetongue,andatthe sametimeothersnotbeingcapableofhavingdoneit?Besides,ifotherstoohadnot

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 18 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE usedtheirvoiceswithoneanother,fromwherewasthenotionofutilityimplanted, andfromwherewasthispowerfirstgrantedtohim,toknowwhathewantedtodo andconceiveofitinhismind?Similarly,onepersoncouldnothaveprevailedand forcedsomanytowanttolearnthenamesofthingssothoroughly[...](Lucretius Carus2003[?54bc]:ll.1041–51). Lucretius thereby suggests that language emerged and evolved from the collective communicative acts of individuals interacting with each other. We may, in modern terms, think of different interactants innovating on different occasions and the suc- cessful innovations being copied by others. This is the position articulated by Michel Bréal in the late nineteenth century (see below), in contrast with the vast majority of scholarswhohavesimplyignoredthequestion. Theredoesn’tseemtohavebeenmuchspeculationontheoriginsoflanguagesince Lucretiusuntiltheeighteenthcentury,‘the(Ageof)Enlightenment.’Thecontribution oftheRenaissanceperiodappearstobenegligible,asthefocuswason(thelogicof)the structure of language, epitomized by the Port-Royal Grammar, published in 1660 by ClaudeLancelotandAntoineArnauld.It’snotevidentwhatthereasonforthisreturn to the subject matter of the origins of language was, except perhaps that the post- Renaissancesocialphilosophers,sointerestedindefendingthenaturalrightsofpeople andfreeingfellowcitizensfromsuperstitionandthecreationistdogmaofChristianity, may have wanted also to have a better understanding of the origins of mankind. Convinced that rationality distinguishes mankind from other animals, they were interested in the apparent chicken-and-egg connection between humans’ mental capacityandlanguage. A name that was particularly influential in the eighteenth century was Étienne Bonnot de Condillac, who, according to Aarsleff (1982), then launched debates on the origins of language with his Essai sur l’origine des connoissances humaines (1746). Hearguedthatlanguageisaconsequenceofhumans’beingrationalandneedingthis tooltoexpresstheirthoughts.Althoughhesawlanguageasconstrainedbyitsphonetic architecturetolinearizethought,healsoclaimedthatlanguagegivesmorestructureto thought processes and is the foundation of (the growth of) human knowledge. This sounds similar to Bickerton’s (e.g. 1990) claim that the emergence of language, espe- ciallysyntax,enhancedhumancapacityforthought(seebelow). Contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic Church, the dominant one at his time, Condillac, an abbot, concluded that language was man-made, the product of humans’capacityforcreativethought,andnotGod-given,apositionadoptedbyother eighteenth century philosophers. He is also reported to have contributed to, if not started,thehypothesisthatlanguageemergedfromnaturalcries.Althoughitwouldbe derided by Friedrich Max Müller in the nineteenth century (see below), this position addresses the question of how humans evolved from the mere production of ‘natural Yetonecanarguethatsyntax,alsophonologyandmorphology,arejustaconsequenceoflinearity, constrainedthoughitisbyother,cognitiveorpragmaticfactors.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE cries,’ identified today as holistic vocalizations, to phonetic ones, which Condillac characterized as ‘vocal signs,’ at least according to Aarsleff (1982). This is a question that still awaits a conclusive answer (see esp. Wray 2002, Tallerman 2007, and Bick- erton 2010) and on which MacNeilage (2008) contributes some significant insights (seebelow). The hypothesis that the original ancestor of language lies in the natural cries and gestureswasalsodevelopedbyJean-JacquesRousseauinhis1755essayontheoriginof language,inDiscourssurl’origineetlesfondementsdel’inégalitéparmileshommes.For him, cries and gestures are the language most expressive of humans’ passions, which dominated in the earliest phylogenetic stages of mankind. The evidence can allegedly stillbefoundin‘savage’orlessadvancedpopulations,particularlyinsoutherly,warmer climates, where humans are, according to him, closer to nature. It is not that those populationsarestillintheprimordialorlessevolvedstagesofhumanevolution, the order of their progress is different. In southern climates, where nature is bountiful, needs are born of passion. In cold countries, where she is miserly, passions are born of need, and the languages, sad daughters of necessities, reflect theiraustereorigin.(1755;MoranandGode’stranslation,1966:46) According to Rousseau, the passions are still best expressed through tones (and intonation) and gestures, and thus in tonal languages. However, ‘while visible signs canrenderamoreexactimitation,soundsmoreeffectivelyarouseinterest’(Moranand Gode 1966: 9), which is why, as communication became less and less passionate and more and more referential/rational, speech prevailed as a means of communication. Like most philosophers and philologists of the eighteenth century, Rousseau did not realize that tones play a contrastive lexical and/or grammatical function in many languages, although this is not the case in most European languages. On the other hand, like some modern students of the origins of language (e.g. Tomasello 2008, MacNeilage 2008, Corballis 2010, Dor and Jablonka 2010, Mufwene 2010b), Rousseau also assumed that modern language emerged under social ecological pressures, espe- cially out of the need to help each other understand what they had to do in order to survive danger (pp. 47–8). On the other hand, unlike today’s scholars, Rousseau interpretedevolutionasprogresstowardsamoreexplicitarchitecturemeanttoexpress reasonmorethanemotion.Accordingtohim, Anyone who studies the history and progress of tongues will see that the more wordsbecomemonotonous,themoreconsonantsmultiply;that,asaccentsfallinto disuse and quantities are neutralized, they are replaced by grammatical combin- ations and new articulations. [...] To the degree that needs multiply [...] language changes its character. It becomes more regular and less passionate. It substitutesideasforfeelings.Itnolongerspeakstotheheartbuttoreason.(Moran andGode1966:16) Thus,Rousseauinterpretedtheevolutionoflanguageasgradual,reflectingchangesin the Homo genus’s mental, social, and environmental structures. He also suggests that

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 20 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE consonants emerged after vowels (at least some of them), out of necessity to keep ‘words’less‘monotonous.’Consonantswouldputativelyhavemadeiteasiertoidentify transitions from one syllable to another. He speaks of ‘break[ing] down the speaking voice into a given number of elementary parts, either vocal or articulate [i.e. conson- antal?], with which one can form all the words and syllables imaginable’ (p. 17). This account appears to anticipate Peter MacNeilage’s notion of ‘syllabic variegation’ (seebelow). Like his contemporaries and predecessors, Rousseau did not (always) distinguish sounds from the letters, but he also had curious positions about the latter. He associatedpictographicwritingwith‘asavagepeople,signsofwordsandpropositions [with]abarbaricpeople,andthealphabet[with]civilizedpeoples’(p.17). This stratification of populations was a common belief until the early twentieth century (see below). However, it is not out of place to discuss, in the context of the evolution of language, the evolution, of writing systems as technology designed to overcome some of the shortcomings of speech and signing. Writing does not just extendourcapacitytorememberandcarrytolongerdistanceswhatwasorcouldhave been spoken or signed. For instance, Chinese ideograms are additionally efficient in enabling speakers of mutually unintelligible Sinitic language varieties to understand each other. In this particular respect, they also illustrate why evolution should not be thought of in rectilinear and unilinear terms, as there is room for variation. While alphabetic writing systems, designed to capture speech, may be preferred (by the principles of economy and productivity) for their simplicity, they cannot accomplish the role Chinese ideograms play in bridging dialectal differences with regard to meaning. Scholars who think of language as technology (Smith and Szathmáry 1999, Lee et al. 2009, Mufwene 2010a) will hail Rousseau for bringing writing as derivative technologyintothepicture.It’sundoubtedlyalsorelevanttoasktowhatextentwriting hasinfluencedlanguageevolutionduringthehistoricalperiod(Wang2011). Rousseau questioned the Adamic hypothesis on the origins of modern language, arguingthatthelanguagethatGodhadtaughtAdamandwaslearnedbythechildren of Noah perished after the latter abandoned agriculture and scattered. Modern lan- guage is therefore a new invention (Moran and Gode 1966: 36). Rousseau may have been concerned more about the diversification of the language that Noah’s children hadspokenbeforetheydispersedthanabouttheoriginsoflanguageitself.Heassumed the speciation to have happened before the Tower of Babel explanation in the Judeo- Christiantradition. Languagediversificationisatopicthathasnotbeensufficientlydiscussedintoday’s literature on the evolution of language(s). The focus has typically been language as a commonendowmentofallhumans,thusobviatingthequestionofwhethertheorigins ofmodernlanguagesweremonogeneticorpolygenetic.Iftheyevolvedultimatelyfrom one language, was this original language internally variable or not? Accounts of how linguistic diversity emerged should vary, depending on whether one assumes mono- genesiswithoutinternalvariationorpolygenesiswiththepossibilityofvariationfrom onehominincolonytoanother.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE It is thus noteworthy that, unlike most of his contemporaries and somewhat anticipating variational evolutionary theory, Rousseau also addressed the question of the consequences of inter-idiolectal variation in the emergence of language as a communalphenomenon: [E]achindividualisunique,possessedof,eveninsomewaysidenticalwith,hisown natureor‘essence’whileparticipatinginthewholeofnature,thewholeofreality,so speak. In so far as there is plurality of individuals, and one individual (or group) practicesanyoftheartsonothers,thereisabasisforcontrastingnature(thenature ofone)andart(theartofanother).(MoranandGode1966:76) Inmodernterms,everyidiolectdiffersfromothers.Thissituationraisestheinteresting question of how they converge toward the same communal norm (Mufwene 2008, 2010b). Does normalization as emergence of a communalnorm entail elimination, or justreduction,ofvariation?Whatdoesitreallymeanwhentwoormoreindividualsare said to speak the same language? One should also ask: what role has inter-idiolectal variationplayedintheevolutionoflanguage? AcontemporaryofJean-JacquesRousseau,theGermanphilologistJohannGottfried Herder contributed to the debates on some of the above issues, with his Über den ursprung der Sprache (1772), translated and published in Moran and Gode (1966) as Essay on the origin of language (which is cited here). Herder especially argued that human language was not God-given, and that it started in animal communication (p. 94). Like Lucretius, he thought that even Hebrew, assumed then to be the oldest language, was too imperfect to be God’s creation (pp. 94, 96), though he could have made allowance for change, which normally disturbs the original design, over time. Likewise,heobserved: Now trace, if you can, divine order in the fact that a god, who saw the plan of language as a whole, invented seventy words for the stone and none for all the indispensable ideas, innermost feelings, and abstractions, that in one case he drowned us in unnecessary abundance while leaving us in the other in the direst need which obliged us to steal and usurp metaphors and talk half nonsense, etc. (p.153) ThedistributionofthevocabularywithinandacrosslanguagesappearedtoHerderto betooinconsistentforthelattertobeGod’screation(s).LikeRousseau,heconcluded thatsuchvaryingrealitycouldonlyreflecttheworkofmankind. Herder was ambivalent about the origins of language. On the one hand, he argued against Rousseau’s and Condillac’s position that it evolved from emotional cries (p. 102). On the other, he admitted that it may have started as animal-like cries, with thedifferencethathumanutterancesintheformofspeecharevolitionalanddrivenby reason (p. 99). He concludes several pages later that early human language ‘was an expressionofthelanguageofallcreatureswithinthenaturalscaleofthehumanvoice’ (p.137).

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 22 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE Herder also argued that knowledge of particular languages is not instinctive; the child learns the language of its social environment. Anticipating modern linguists, he clarified that what is being discussed is the capacity for language, what Ferdinand de SaussurereferredtoasthefacultédelangageandgenerativistsasUniversalGrammar or biological endowment for language. He observed that this capacity, which is also shared by the deaf (p. 118), enables humans to learn naturalistically, through inter- actionsorbyimmersion,whateverlanguagetheyhavebeenexposedto.Thisofcourse leaves unanswered the question of how in the first place this particular capacity for language evolved in mankind and in what form. It also leaves open the question of how particular languages displaying both structural diversity and common/universal featuresevolved(seebelow). Herderalsospeculatedthatlanguagestartedwiththepracticeofnaming.Heclaimed that predicates, which denote activities and conditions, were the first names; nouns were derived from them (pp. 132, 160). He thus partly anticipated Heine and Kuteva (2007),whoarguethatgrammaremergedgradually,throughthegrammaticizationof nounsandverbsintogrammaticalmarkers,includingcomplementizers,whichmakeit possibletoformcomplexsentences.AnissuearisingfromHerder’spositioniswhether nouns and verbs could not have emerged concurrently. Not quite in the same way, Allan(2010a:230)commentsthatHerderwasmoreconcernedwithprovingthat‘God could nothave inventedhumanlanguage because,asthe WesternClassical Tradition affirms,thelogicalorderistonameentitiesfirstandthenpredicateactsandattributes ofthem.’ Ontheotherhand,ashypothesizedbyWilliamDwightWhitney(discussedbelow), theoriginalnamingpracticeneednothaveentailedthedistinctionbetweennounsand verbs and the capacity to predicate. At that time, naming may have amounted to pointingwith(pre-)linguisticsigns;predicationmayhavestartedonlyafterhominins werecapableofdescribingstatesofaffairscompositionally,combiningword-sizeunits inthiscase,ratherthanholophrastically.Thisissuecannotbeaddressedindependently of what Bickerton’s (1990) ‘protolanguage’ is and when it may have emerged. The question of the order in which other grammatical categories emerged remains open, there being no conclusive evidence in support of the particular order proposed by HeineandKuteva(2007).Inanycase,Herderalsoarguedthatlanguagewas‘thechild ofreasonandsociety’(p.91).Hethoughtthat‘vowelsarethefirst,themostvitalthings, the hinges of language’ (p. 95), which appears to suggest evolution from primate-like vocalizations. AnotherimportantphilosopheroftheeighteenthcenturywasPierreLouisMoreau de Maupertuis, author of Réflexions sur l’origine des langues et la vie des mots (1748). Among other things, he sought to answer the question of whether modern languages can ultimately be traced back to one single common ancestor or whether current diversity reflects polygenesis, with different populations developing their own lan- guages. Associating monogenesis with the Tower of Babel myth, which needs a deus exmachina,God,toaccountforthediversificationoflanguages,herejecteditinfavour of polygenesis. Note, however, that his position needs Cartesianism, which assumes

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE that all humans are endowed with the same mental capacity and suggests that our hominin ancestors could have invented similar communicative technologies at the same or similar stages of our phylogenetic evolution. This position makes it natural to project the existence of language as the common essence of languages beyond their differences. Saussure (1962 [1916]) may be credited with similar thinking when he observed that le langage ‘language’ is heteroclitic, anterior to languages and more naturalthanthem,andyetderivingitsunityfromthelatter(pp.25–26).Theseconsider- ationsprovidethebackgroundforspeakingofuniversalsinthearchitectureoflanguage andof(constraintson)parametrictypologicalvariation. Inthenineteenthcentury,scholarshipontheoriginsoflanguagewasenrichedwith an alternative perspective. Charles Darwin commented in The Descent of Man (1871) thattheevolutionoflanguagewasinseveralwaysreminiscentofthatofmankinditself. Hehypothesizedthatithademergedgradually,hadnotbeengivenbyGodorinvented bydesignbyhumans,andcouldalsobeexplainedbynaturalselection.Hewasamong the first to correlate the evolution of language with that of the human mind (see also Müller 1880 [1861]), thus accounting for why parrots cannot produce original spoken messages intentionally, although they can imitate human speech fairly accurately. Showing what an important driver role the human mind has played in the evolution of language,he argued that it was forthe samereason that other primates donot use theirbuccopharyngealstructuretospeak. We now know that Charles Darwin was only partly right. The other primates’ buccopharyngeal structure is not shaped in exactly the same way as that of humans, although, based on the parrot’s phonetic accomplishments, we must wonder how critical this particular structure was for the emergence of language (not speech!) in thefirstplace.Afterall,humanswhocannotspeakproducesignedlanguage,whichis just as adequate for communication. This argument may be claimed to support the position that the emergence of the capacity for language must be distinguished from the emergence of languages. However, one must also wonder whether the two ques- tionscanbeconsideredindependentlyofeachother(seebelow). On the other hand, like eighteenth-century philosophers, Charles Darwin also claimed that complex thought could not ‘be carried on without the aid of words.’ Manymodernlinguistsdoubtthatthelanguageofthoughtisstructuredjustlikespoken orsignedlanguage.Itdoesnotappeartobeconstrainedbylinearity(seebelow).Infact, in its most fundamental form it does not appear to depend on these communication mediaandisontologicallyanteriortothem.Justbecausethelanguageoffundamental thoughtisprobablystructureddifferently,itdoesnotfollowthatitislesscomplexthan spokenorsignedlanguage.Theevidenceappearstobelackingregardingtherolethat speechandsigningallegedlyplayinstructuringhumanthinking.Itseemssonaturalto claimthatcomplexlanguageevolvedinresponsetothecommunicativeneedsofsocial mindsthatwerebecomingmoreandmorecomplex. CharlesDarwinshouldbecreditedforsubsumingthetopicoflanguagevitality,asit should be under the umbrella of language evolution (Mufwene 2001, 2008). He paid attention to the spread of some languages at the expense of others, a topic that

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 24 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE linguistics has dealt with recently under the heading of ‘language endangerment.’ However, he also thought of some populations and their languages as less evolved thanothers,althoughhedidnotestablishanyobviouscorrelationbetweenthealleged lessevolvedpopulationsandlessevolvedlanguages.Thisisarecurrentclaimthrough- out the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, whereby non-Europeans are often de- scribed as ‘savages’ and the position of their languages on a putative evolutionary trajectory as ‘primitive,’ simplybecause theirmorphologiesare toocomplex (the case of agglutinating and polysynthetic languages), or they have no morphophonology (the case of isolating languages), and/or they are tonal. Though Charles Darwin also concludedthatracesareprobablythecounterpartsofsubspeciesinbiology,hewasstill aprisonerofthesocialprejudicesofhistime(Mufwene2008:ch.6).Hishypotheseson theevolutionoflanguagewerethustaintedbythem. ItisworthmentioninginthiscontextthecontributionthatGeorgeHowardDarwin, Charles Darwin’s son and an accomplished astronomer and mathematician, made to thesubject ofthe evolutionof language.He defendedhisfather andDwightWhitney against Friedrich Max Müller, both of whose views are discussed below. In his essay titled‘ProfessorWhitneyontheOriginofLanguage’(1874),GeorgeDarwinespecially supported the idea that human language may have started from ‘the imitational and interjectionalsourcesof[Aryan]roots,’thatthenumberofinitialrootsmusthavebeen very smallattheearlystages oftrue languageandeverythingelse developedlater.He elaborates: It is surely probable that that many generations of quasi-men passed away, who usedasmallvocabularyofconventionalisedcries,thatthesecriesbecamemoreand more conventionalised, by departing more and more from the sounds of exclam- ations, from which they took their origin. Many roots would probably propagate themselves by fission, and give rise to new roots, gradually to become entirely separatefromtheironomatopoeicoriginals.(HarrisandPyle1996:288) Max Müller had ridiculed as ‘bow-wow theory’ the hypothesis that human language hadstartedfromimitationsofanimalsounds,interjections,etc.Inhisessaytitled‘The theoretical stage, and the origin of language’ (1861), Müller argues that what distin- guishes humans from other animals is not so much speech but the ‘inward faculty which is called the faculty of abstraction, [...] which is better known to us by the homelynameofReason.’AgainstCharlesDarwin’sunjustifiedassertionthatthereare languageswithoutabstractterms(ofcoursespokenby‘savages’),heobservesthatevery (denoting?) word ‘contains a predicative root’ which ‘expresses a general concept’ (HarrisandPyle1996:197).Againstthe‘bow-wowtheory,’Müllerarguesthatalthough thereareinterjectionsandonomatopoeictermsineverylanguage,‘asyetnolanguage hasbeendiscoveredthatwassoformed.’Accordingtohim,‘interjectionsareonlythe outskirts of real language,’ which begins where they end (Harris and Pyle 1996: 23). Althoughitisconceivablethat‘somekindoflanguagemighthavebeenformed’based ononomatopoeiasandinterjection,itcouldnothavebeen‘alanguagelikethatwhich wefindinnumerousvarietiesamongallracesofmen’(p.24).

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE Inhis1873‘LecturesonMr.Darwin’sPhilosophyofLanguage,’Müllerisundecided about whether the roots emerged in a protracted fashion or all at the same time. His overall position raises the question of when grammar emerged in the phylogeny of humanlanguageandwhether,inthefirstplace,ourhomininancestorswerecapableof producingphoneticsoundsatthetimetheydevelopedtheinitialvocabulary.Nonethe- less, the original roots evolved gradually into the vocabulary of modern spoken languages, some of them becoming grammatical terms, as argued today by Heine andKuteva(2007). 4 On the other hand, Müller also thought that some languages are primitive and simpler, especially those with an isolating morphosyntax. Within the context of complexity/simplicity in language, this is fundamentally the thesis defended recently byMcWhorter(1998,2001),accordingtowhomcreolesarenotonlyyounglanguages but also the world’s simplest. According to the latter, creole ‘prototypes’ lack deriv- ations, inflections, and tones, all being features that older languages have putatively acquiredthroughmuchlongerhistoriesofevolutionandaccretion.Independentofthe forcefulandextensive rebuttalprovidedby DeGraff(2001), howironical itisthat,for reasonsthatarenosounder,muchoftheeighteenth-andnineteenth-centuryliterature ontheevolutionoflanguageconsideredinflectionsandtonestobeprimitivefeatures! As we will see soon in the discussion of Otto Jespersen’s views, creoles could thus be consideredmoreevolvedthantheirEuropeanlexifiersandotherlanguages. ObjectingtoCharlesDarwin’shypothesisthathumanlanguages,likedifferentraces ofman,haveevolvedfromacommonancestor,Müller(1873)states: [B]ecause the merest tyro in anatomy knew that the different races of man constituted so many species, that species were the result of independent creative acts,andthattheblack,brown,red,yellow,andwhiteracescould notpossiblybe conceivedasdescendedfromonesource.(HarrisandPyle1996:175) ThisremarkisreminiscentofobjectionsmadebysomescholarssuchasMaine(1875) and Freeman (1881, 1886) to Sir William Jones’s 1786 hypothesis that Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, and other Indo-European languages had all evolved ultimately from the same protolanguage. They thought that the Indians were too ‘barbaric’ to share genetic ancestry, racially and linguistically, with Europeans. Otherwise, Müller’s objection conjures up the question of whether monogenesis and transformational evolution, as typicallysuggestedinlinguistics,canaccountadequatelyfortheemergenceoflinguistic diversity,especiallyifnoallowanceismadeforinternalvariationintheprotolanguage àlaBickerton(1990).Inthisrespect,modernlinguistswouldberemisstooverlookthe fact that Charles Darwin invoked natural selection as applying to variation which he assumedtoobtaininanypopulation(seebelow). Notethat,althoughthebookistitledTheGenesisofGrammar,HeineandKutevaofferno plausiblehypothesisofhowtheoverallgrammarevolved,beyondtheemergenceoffreegrammatical morphemesandafewinflections.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 26 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE Müller thought that ‘collateral development’ (polygenesis) was more likely to ac- count for some of the differences between dialects and languages. According to him, there is no reason why different individuals at different places and/or different times would have solved the same communicative challenges in identical ways, even when they are endowed with the same ‘instinct, gift, talent, faculty, proprium’ for language (1873:228–9).HewasclearlynotCartesian!Nonetheless,hemaintainedthatlanguage was a means ‘for the formation of thought’ (pp. 231–2), oddly in agreement with Darwininthiscase. Müllerwasalsostronglyopposedtothehypothesisthathumansarephylogenetically related to the great apes and monkeys. He concluded that Darwin must have been confused, ignoring the fact that human language is unattainable by other animals (p. 183). The question is whether this state of affairs is a consequence of Müller’s suggestionthatthegreatapesarenotphylogeneticallyrelatedtohumans.Onewonders whathewouldthinkoftoday’sattemptstoget somegreatapestocommunicatewith humans in approximations of sign language or with lexigrams, or even of claims that theyunderstandspeech. Like Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Müller stipulated a distinction between ‘emotional language’ and ‘rational language.’ Accordingly, the former is something that humans sharewithanimalsandinwhichimitationsof‘naturalcries’fit,whereasthelatteristhe outer side of the mind and is unique to mankind. Müller was curious how one may account for the evolution from ‘emotional’ to the ‘rational language’ (1873: 225). This question has remained hard to answer, though one may suggest that our hominin ancestors may have started with modulating their vocalizations into sequences of contrasting syllabic peaks, thus producing different vowels. However, as discussed below, more was involved in the process; we need to learn from paleontology and other relevant disciplines about how we evolved mentally, anatomically, and socially from Homo habilis to Homo sapiens sapiens to be able to account adequately for the transition. William Dwight Whitney responded to Müller in his article titled ‘Nature and Origin of Language’(1875), byfirst articulating a distinctionbetween the‘capacity for language,’withwhicheverynormalhumanisendowed,and‘speech.’Thecriticalpoint is that the ‘capacity’ has made it possible for humans to develop language or learn whatever is spoken and/or signed in their social environment. This ‘capacity’ distin- guishes mankind from animals, although, as recent findings about bird songs have made clear (e.g. Margoliash 2010), the observation should be mitigated (see below). Whitneyarguesthat‘theonlyconsciousmotive’fordevelopinglanguagewascommu- nication, which is certainly at odds with Bickerton’s (1990) claim that it was made to enhance human capacity for thought. Then he reformulates the ‘bow-wow theory’ as follows: Spoken language began [...] when a cry of pain, formerly wrung out by real suffering, and seen to be understood and sympathized with, was repeated in

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE imitation,nolongerasamereinstinctiveutterance,forthepurposeofintimatingto another,‘Iam(was,shallbe)suffering.’(HarrisandPyle1996:298) Whitney thus saw the foundations of language in the intentional use of the cries and othersounds.Thenheproceededtoaddressthequestionofhowspokenlanguagehas emergedasthedominantmodeofexplicitcommunicationinmankind: [I]tissimplybyakindofprocessofnaturalselectionandsurvivalofthefittestthat thevoicehasgainedtheupperhand,andcometobesomuchthemostprominent that we give the name of language (‘tonguiness’) to all expression. There is no mysteriousconnectionbetweenthethinkingapparatusandthearticulatingappar- atus,wherebytheactionthatformsathoughtsetsthetongueswingingtoutterit. (HarrisandPyle1996:300) Asweshallseebelow,‘naturalselection’isnotmuchofanexplanationifonedoesnot mentionthefactorsthatinfluencedtheresolutionofthecompetitioninthisparticular direction.Ontheotherhand, likeCharles Darwin,Whitneyseemsalsoinfluenced by thesocialprejudiceofhistime,asinthefollowingpassagethatshouldnotresonatewell tospeakersoftonelanguages: [T]one, and still more gesture, has assumed the subordinate office of aiding the effectiveness of what is uttered. And the lower the intellectual condition of the speaker and the spoken-to, the more indispensable is the addition of tone and gesture.(HarrisandPyle1996:302) Thebiasagainstnon-Indo-Europeansisequallystronginthefollowingpassage: An infinity of things can be said in English which cannot be said in Fijian or Hottentot;avastdeal,doubtless,canbesaidinFijianorHottentotwhichcouldnot besaidinthefirsthumanlanguage.(HarrisandPyle1996:307) A great deal can be said in Fijian, Hottentot, and other non-European languages that cannotbesaidinEuropeanlanguageseither,justastherearethingsthatcanbesaidin English but cannot be readily expressed in French, for instance, and vice versa. Whitney also claimed that the earliest form of linguistic communication must have been holographic, consisting of one-word utterances, without a formal distinction betweenentities andactions;parts ofspeechandpredication emerged later,andeven laterthecombinationsofwordsbelongingindifferentlexicalcategoriesintocomplex utterances (Harris and Pyle 1966: 306, 308). As noted above, this comes as an apt rejoinder to Herder’s speculations, although, as with everything else, this must be verifiedbyfutureresearch.Likehiscontemporaries,Whitneythoughtthatinflectional orfusionallanguagesrepresentahighlevelof‘cultivation.’However,healsothoughtof theevolutionoflanguageasthe‘accidental[...]productofforcesandcircumstances sonumerousandsoindeterminablethatwecannotestimatethemandcouldnothave predicted their result’ (pp. 312–13). In this respect, he is like today’s emergentists, for whomevolutionislargelydrivenbyself-organization.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 28 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE Several other scholars, many of them anonymous, published on the origins of languageinthenineteenthcentury.Oneofthenon-anonymouswasthesocialanthro- pologist Edward Burnett Tylor. In a 1866 paper titled ‘On the Origin of Language’, heattemptedtosupportthe‘bow-wowtheory’byinvokingthewaysinwhich‘savages’ inthecoloniesnamedthegoodstheEuropeansbrought,usingwordsbasedonsounds associated withthegoods.Forinstance,theSea IslandersinthePacificallegedlyused puformusket,puhifor‘toblow’(astheythoughttheEuropeanblewinthegun),puff for the smoke coming out of the musket, and pupuhi for the barrel of a gun. He concluded: If several languages have independently chosen like words to express like sounds, then we may reasonably suppose we are not deluding ourselves in thinking that suchwordsarehighlyappropriatetotheirpurpose.Thuswehavesuchformsaspu, puf,bu,bufrecurringinthemostremoteanddifferentlanguageswiththemeaning ofblowingorpuffing.(HarrisandPyle1996:91) Inanote,heillustrateshisclaimwiththefollowinglist:‘Tonganbuhi,Mahjoripupui, Zulu pu, Hebrew puach &c.’ He likewise finds evidence for the common origin of languageinthecross-linguisticsimilaritiesamongwordsusedfor‘father’and‘mother’, words which, according to him, vary more in their consonants than in their vowels (p. 95). It did not matter at all to him that some terms that are phonetically similar sometimes denote opposite entities. It is striking how nineteenth-century scholars reallythoughtthatthecolonialpopulationswereapparentlylessevolvedanatomically and/or mentally and therefore may provide evidence for how language evolved. Nowadays, we have to deal with Bickerton’s (1990) controversial claim that pidgins (typicallythosebasedonEuropeanlanguages)representfossilsofhis‘protolanguage.’ NobodyarticulatestheabovethesisasexplicitlyastheRevdFredericWilliamFarrar, who,inhis1865bookLanguageandLanguages,asserts: Savagelanguagesare[...]thebesttoshowuswhatmusthavebeentheprimitive procedure;butwecantracethesamenecessaryelementsofwordsinlanguagesfar moreadvanced.(HarrisandPyle1996:59) Arguing that language is too imperfect to be God’s creation, he also interpreted the multiplicity of languages as evidence that language is an invention of mankind, ‘developed by intelligence and thought. [...] It may be unable to keep pace with the advancing power of abstraction, but it can never by any possibility anticipate or outstripit’(p.45).Headduced evidenceforhumans’abilitytoinventlanguagesfrom whatisnowknownas‘homesignlanguage’andfromtheabilityofabandonedchildren living in groups to develop a language of their own (pp. 54–5). This evidence should actually be used to highlight the fact that, from an evolutionary perspective, the language phenomenon under discussion is a communal one, which does not emerge unless there is population of individuals, at least two, who interact with each other. (See also Lieberman 2006: 354ff.) Unless a situation such as the Nicaraguan boarding

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE school for the deaf arises, no particular communal sign language emerges from the practicesofisolatedhomesignersinteractingonlywiththeirspeakingrelatives. Not unlike Bickerton (1990) with pidgins and creoles, Farrar thought that the modificationsofEuropeanlanguagesinthecoloniesmightshedlightonhowlanguage evolved,justliketheinventionof‘Argots’by‘thedangerousclassesthroughoutEurope’ (Harris and Pyle 1966: 66). According to him, because they are not intelligible to speakers of the languages from which they have evolved or been developed, they ‘must, from their very nature, remain uncultivated’ (p. 66). Although he assumed that language emerged gradually, he discussed the complexity of ‘savage languages’ in a way that reveals again strong prejudice against non-Europeans. This was indeed the century of ‘la mission civilisatrice’ or ‘the white man’s burden,’ ideologies de- velopedbytheFrenchandtheBritishrespectivelytojustifyexploitationcolonization. Being non-European, isolating languages were deemed primitive and, according to Farrar,alsoagglutinatingandpolysyntheticlanguages.Putatively,the‘apparentwealth ofsynonymsandgrammaticalformsischieflyduetothehopelesspovertyofthepower ofabstraction’(Farrar’sitalics,p.78).Thiswouldallegedlybeobviousinlanguagesthat lackthecopula.Allsuchremarksthatareundoubtedlyoffensivetoday,atleasttosome of us, underscore how cautious we must be in how we use our findings about some modernlinguisticsystemstomakeinferencesabouttheevolutionoflanguage. We should, of course, not ignore Friedrich Wilhelm Christian Karl Ferdinand Freiherr von Humboldt, who conceived of language dynamically in terms of the ‘energeia’ that translates the ‘inner linguistic sense’ into the outer expression, in which the universe of experience is categorized differently from one community to another.HemaybeconsideredtheforerunneroftheSapir–Whorfhypothesis.Whatis especially relevant to the study of the evolution of language (a topic on which Humboldt did not say much) is the individuality of the inner sense, which makes every idiolect different but also every dialect and every language different, as the dynamics leading to social norms vary from one community to another. Humboldt alsoclaimedthatdifferentpopulationshavenotevolvedidenticallyindevelopingtheir linguisticindividuality.HecharacterizedtheevolutionoflanguageaswhatHarrisand Taylor(1989:177)paraphraseas‘thecontinuousoutcomeof[the]dialecticbetweenthe inner linguistic sense and sound-form; that is, between energeia and ergon.’ Every individual speaker contributes to this process, as they reshape but do not reproduce perfectlythelanguageoftheirsocialenvironment. Then we must now ask how the different individuals, innovators and copiers, ultimately converge toward shared communal norms (Mufwene 2008). Note that invoking either the ‘invisible hand’ or ‘self-organization’ is simply admitting that we cannotyetarticulateexplicitlyhowthemutualaccommodationsthatspeakers/signers make to each other, in their ever-changing dyadic and triadic interactions, evolve to these‘conventions.’ Itis likesaying that languages take on lives of their own when in realitytheagentsandhostsarethespeakersorsigners(Mufwene2001).Theconclusion does not take us farther than Saussure’s 1916 correct observation that ‘la parole fait évoluerlalangue’(‘speechmakeslanguageevolve’),withoutexplaininghowitdoesit.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 30 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE Theforegoinggivesusarepresentativecanvasofthestateoftheartintheeighteenth andnineteenthcenturiesconcerningtheevolutionoflanguage.Italsogivesusasense ofthekindsofcontroversialspeculationthatledtheSociétédeLinguistiquedeParisin 1866 to ban any linguistic discussions on the subject matter at its meetings. Only one more scholar is worth noting from the period, the semanticist Michel Bréal, who argued against the French ban on the ground that it impoverished the subject matter oflinguistics.Bréalsawlanguagesasbeingreshapedconstantlybytheirspeakers,and rejectedhiscontemporaries’organicapproachtothem.Hethoughttheapproachwas inaccurate in casting some languages not only as less evolved than others but also as decaying or dying. He would undoubtedly have opposed the present discourse about language birth, vitality, and endangerment, as well as about moribund languages, though it can be argued that languages conceived of as species (Paul 1880, Mufwene 2001) are born and may die in the same protracted ways biological species do, unlike individualorganisms(Mufwene2008:208–9). Asnotedabove,theFrenchbanappearstohavebeenrespectedevenoutsideFrance. It became almost taboo to discuss the evolution of language throughout most of twentieth century, until the 1990s, which I discuss in the next section. 5 Among the exceptions to the rule are the Dane Otto Jespersen, in his book Language: Its Nature, DevelopmentandOrigin(1922a)andtheAmericanMorrisSwadesh,whosebookOrigin and Diversification of Language, written in 1967 but published posthumously in 1971, alsochangedthenatureofthediscourse. Otto Jespersen’s contributions to the study of the origins of language include his argumentthatthe‘bow-wow’theory(claimingtheoriginsoflanguageintheimitation ofsoundsinnature),the‘pooh-pooh’theory(basedonhumaninterjections),andthe ‘yo-he-yo’ theory (based on human sounds during collective physical work) need not dismissed offhand. ‘Each of the three chief theories enables one to explain parts of languagebutstillonlyparts,andnoteventhemostimportantparts—themainbodyof languageseemshardlytobetouchedbyanyofthem’(1922a:416). A more important and relatively uncontroversial contribution of Jespersen’s is his positionthatwecanlearnindirectlyabouttheoriginsoflanguagebyfocusingoninfant language during the first year of what is still nonlinguistic interaction with the caretakers, focusing on its cooing, babbling, and gestures. Later scholars such as Tomasello (2008) have suggested the development of joint attention, observable in human infants but not in great apes, as an important determinative factor in the evolution of language. Babies’ ability to take turns in vocalization games also appears tobeevidenceofjointattention. AccordingtoHombertandLenclud(inpress),muchofthispracticehastodowithwhatthe linguiststhoughtwasthesubjectmatteroftheirdiscipline.FerdinanddeSaussurewasallegedlymore interestedinlanguages(leslangues),whichconsistofsystems,areunified,butarenotorganic.Hewas lessinterestedinlanguage(lelangage),whichheputativelyconsidered‘multiformandheteroclitic’ (asnotedabove),straddlingdomainsthatare‘physical,physiological,andpsychic’[i.e.mental?].

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE Jespersen also advocated paying attention to trends in how human languages have evolved in documented history, though the conclusions he suggests are controversial. HepointsoutthatEuropeanlanguagessuchasEnglishandFrenchhaveevolvedfrom morecomplexmorphosyntaxtosimpler,analyticonesandfromstructuresputatively harder to learn and full of irregularities to more regular and systematic ones. ‘The direction of the movement is toward flexionless languages (such as Chinese, or to a certain extent Modern English) with freely combinable elements’ (1922a: 425). If, like Jespersen, one adopted from the misguided nineteenth century the view that some languages and related populations are less evolved than others, this would not rank German(whichJespersendoesnotdiscussinthiscontext)veryhighonthescale,nor Basque, which he finds excuses for not lumping into the category of ‘primitive languages.’ His conclusion is that the initial language must have had forms that were morecomplexandnon-analytic;modernlanguagesreflectevolutiontowardperfection whichmustpresumablybefoundinlanguageswithoutinflectionsandtones.Itisnot clearwhatJespersen’spositiononderivationalmorphologyis.Inanycase,hisviewsare at odds with Bickerton’s (1990) hypothesis that the proto-language, which must have emergedbythelateHomoerectus,wasmuchsimplerandhadminimalsyntax,ifany. WhileBickertonseesinpidginsfossilsofthatproto-languageandincreolestheearliest forms of complex grammar that could putatively evolve from them, Jespersen would perhapsseeinthemtheultimatestageoftheevolutionoflanguagetodate.Manyofus todayfinditdifficulttosidewithoneortheotherposition. Rather outrageous is Jespersen’s claim that languages of ‘savages’ in Africa and the Americas could inform us about the origins of language, not only because they have longerwords(withcomplexmorphology,1922a:421),butalsobecausetheyusedifficult soundssuchasclicksandrelyontones(p.419),which,accordingtohim,suggeststhat their speakers are ‘passionate’ (p. 420). ‘Primitive languages’ were accordingly sung, poetic, and figurative (p. 432). Being tonal and using numeral classifiers (pp. 429–30), Chinese would be low on Jespersen’s scale of evolved languages, though it might be better off than languages that are both tonal and have complex morphological struc- tures.Itisofcourseworseforlanguagesthathavenotermssuchas‘colour’forabstract concepts or general categories. Jespersen concludes, among other things: ‘Primitive unitsmusthavebeenmorecomplicatedinpointofmeaning,aswellasmuchlongerin pointofsound,thanthosewithwhichwearemorefamiliar’(p.425).Aspointedoutin Mufwene(2008:ch.6),itisnoteworthyhowlateracelingeredasafactorinaccountsof languageevolutioninlinguistics. In contrast, Morris Swadesh’s arguments are grounded in the then state of the art concerning phonetic and morphological properties of several languages around the world, as well as in paleontological and archaeological evidence. The examination of these led him to draw (among others) the following conclusion, which anticipated Mufwene’s 2010b comparison of the pace of the evolution of language with that of computers, in shorter and shorter intervals of time as we near the present: ‘It seems probablethatlanguagedevelopedinthesamegenerallinesasotheraspectsofhuman culture:veryslowlyatfirstandgraduallyfasterandfaster’(Swadesh2006:45).

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 32 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE However,likemanyothersbeforehim,Swadeshhypothesizedthatlanguagestarted withnaming.Thewordsmayoriginallyhavebeenimitativeofsoundsheardinnature; thentheywere allegedlyreplacedby‘exclamative’ones,andlaterby‘a purelyexpres- siveparadigmandanattention-callingordemonstrativeone’(p.182).Hebelievedthat numerals ‘were among the last to take on their present character’ (p. 183). His world- wide comparison of demonstrative forms led him to the conclusion that ‘before the neoglotticperiod,perhapsinthepaleoglottic,fewerphonemesweredifferentiatedthan in contemporary languages’ (p. 199), suggesting that even the phonetic inventories of modern languages must have evolved gradually, not becoming fully modern until as lateattheemergenceofagriculture. PhilipLieberman(2002)believedphoneticlanguagetohaveemergedearlierwiththe late Homo erectus or archaic Homo sapiens. Although this position has been revised (see below), the most relevant point here is that different parts of language appear to haveevolvedincrementallyandnoparticularmoduleseemstohaveemergedabruptly. It does not appear likely that Homo erectus or archaic Homo sapiens waited until a completephoneticinventorywasinplacebeforeproducingtheirfirstwords,orwaited until there was a complete vocabulary with identifiable morphemes before producing phrases and sentences. Although ontogeny does not recapitulate phylogeny, child language acquisition discourages us from speculating about the phylogenetic emer- gence of language in strictly linear terms. Then, as now, early lexical and phonetic developments must have proceeded concurrently. One may also speculate that the expansion of the lexicon drove the elaboration of a wider phonetic inventory, as this enablesmorelexicaldistinctions. Inthestyleofevolutionarybiology,Swadeshproposesamonogenesisaccountwhich assumesinter-individualvariationinthe‘vocalbehaviour’oftherelevanthominins:‘in additiontoindividualdifferences,therecouldhavebeenvariationsbysub-speciesand by locality, but all within essentially ‘one language’’ (1971 [2006 edn: 213]). Putatively, homininpopulationsequippedwithsimilaranatomicalandmentalstructures,livingin different localities, and having developed comparable communities in which they experiencedsimilarpressurestointeractexplicitly,wouldhavedevelopedcomparable butnon-identicalmeansofcommunication.Thissoundsquiteplausible,asEastAfrica, wheremostofthehomininfossilshavebeenfound,isavastgeographicalarea;todate no paleontological evidence suggests that an early Homo habilis or Homo erectus populationdispersedoutofonesinglelocalitytotherestoftheworld. As argued in Mufwene (2008, 2010b), different individuals endowed with the same capacity for language need not have innovated exactly the same strategies for thesamecommunicativeneeds. Locallyandregionally,theremusthavebeenplentyof 6 AccordingtoDorandJablonka(2010:139),thisvariation‘isinevitablegivengeneticdifferences, anatomicaldifferencesbetweenbrains,differencesamongontogenies,anddifferencesofprocessesof socialization,’whichamountto‘differentdevelopmentaltrajectories.’Mufwene(2008)underestimated theconsequencesofbiologicalvariationacrossindividualswhenheinvoked‘differentinteractional histories’(pp.120,126)inhisaccountofinter-idiolectalvariation.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE variation,asarguedbyJohannGottfriedHerder,whichsettheinnovators’productions upforcompetitionamongtheirimitators.Thiswouldhavesetthingsupforvariational evolution,throughcompetitionandselectionamongavailablealternativesevenwithin the same language, as members of the relevant populations converged toward their respectivenorms.DorandJablonka(2010:138)callthisnormalizationprocess‘canal- ization.’ Swadesh assumed that in the earliest, longest stages of the emergence of language, communication among hominins remained instinctive and did not vary significantly from one locality to another; therefore it is normal to assume that our hominin ancestors spoke the same language. According to him, significant diversity started to emergeabout‘halfamillionorsoyearsago,’whentheearliestformsofphoneticand symbolic communication, which he calls ‘formal language,’ started to emerge (2006: 214–15).TheestimatedperiodisconsistentwiththatproposedbyCorballis(2002)and Lieberman(2002),thoughtheynowthinkotherwise(seebelow).Thisisastagewhen Swadeshbelievesitwaspossiblefordifferentindividualstoinnovatedifferentlinguistic formsforthesamedenotataandpresumablydifferentstructuresforthesamepropos- itions.(WhichisreminiscentofHerder’saccountoftheoriginofsynonymsinvarious languages.) Swadesh’shypothesisraisesthequestionofwhetherhismonogenesispositionisnot really polygenesis; it leaves open the possibility that two late Homo erectus or archaic Homo sapiens populations developed languages that were not structurally identical and/or mutually intelligible. As is obvious from Bickerton’s (1990) hypothesis of the protolanguagefromwhich‘truelanguage’putativelyevolved,allmaydependonwhat particular stage in the evolution of the Homo genus and what particular phase of its vocal communication one decides to identify as the beginnings of modern language. This entails particular assumptions about the size of the phonetic inventory and the natureofgrammar,whicharecapturedeloquentlybyRayJackendoff’s2010title‘Your TheoryofLanguageEvolutionDependsonYourTheoryofLanguage.’ Swadeshisalsooneoftheveryfewscholarswhohaveconsideredtheimplicationsof population movements for language evolution. As the migrants’ languages come into contact, often coexisting in competition with each other for the same communicative functions within the same larger population, some may drive others to extinction. Typically,theprevailinglanguageundergoesstructuralchangesandcanevenspeciate into separate languages. Seldom have linguists who are concerned with language endangerment and loss today cast the subject matter from this perspective, which Mufwene (2001, 2008) articulates in his ecological approach. The contact-based ap- proach to language birth, endangerment, and death makes language evolution more similar to biological evolution, especially regarding the consequences of language practice under differing ecological pressures. The relevant ecology includes not only the mental and anatomical structures of hominins and humans but also the socio- economic conditions that determine their population structures and their particular interactional dynamics. Indeed, the latter also trigger migrations, which history has showntoaffectboththevitalityandstructuresoflanguages.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 34 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE ECENT EVELOPMENTS As a research topic, the evolution of language has expanded into a productive and stimulating, though diverse, area of scholarship since the 1990s. The scholarship has alsoexpanded beyondthe origins oflanguage to include language birthanddeath, as well as language speciation. While philosophers and philologists no longer appear to dealwithit,linguistscanhardlyclaimitasaprivatedomain.Noinsightfulorinforma- tivelinguisticspublicationonthesubjectmatterisbasedexclusivelyonlinguisticdata. Interestingly, this is also an area where generative syntax, which has claimed centre stage since the late 1950s, has probably been unable to prevail over other areas, especially since the notion of Universal Grammar (UG), or ‘biological endowment for language,’ or ‘language organ’ (Chomsky 1986, Anderson and Lightfoot 2002), or ‘bioprogram’ (Bickerton 1981) is still a black box whose contents have not been articulated in sufficient detail and whose capacity to account forhow language works and/orislearnedhasincreasinglybeendisputed(seebelow). NoamChomsky’soccasionalcontributionstothediscourse(e.g.Hauseretal.2002, Chomsky 2010) have aroused controversy, primarily for not considering much of the non-linguistic evidence and for ignoring objections to his claim that recursion is the most importantcharacteristic of the capacity for language that is not shared by other animals. Others have objected that recursion distinguishes human languages from other animals’ means of communication only to a degree. For instance, Margoliash andNusbaum(2009)arguethatsomeformofitoccursinsomebirdsongs.Moreover, it may be a general cognitive, problem-solving strategy, as it is attested outside language, such as in mathematics and musical scores, unless the latter domains are claimed to be consequences of language. According to Lieberman (2006: 4–5; 2010: 164),itcanbeidentifiedindancingtoo.Inaddition,somescholarsarguethatthereis little,perhapsnothing,inthestructureofthehumanbrainthatexistsonlyforlanguage andisnotpartofthegenerallearningadaptation.Languagehasalsoincreasinglybeen interpreted as the gradual cumulation of exaptations of particular mental capacities andanatomicalorgansforcommunication(Hurford2006,Oudeyer2006). Chomsky’s(2010:51)stipulation‘Thestudyoftheevolutionoflanguageisspecific- ally concerned about UG and its origins’ is questionable. An important reason why severalscholarshaveraisedissueswithithastodowithwhetherlanguageboilsdown to UG only, to the exclusion of the physical architecture of language(s). Chomsky’s usualequivocationswiththedisjunctivephrase‘mind/brain’hasnotbeeninformative aboutthenatureofUG.Neurolinguisticshasrevealedthatthereisnoparticularpartof the brain that can be identified as the ‘language organ.’ The fact that the parts of the brain implicated in language are not only situated in different regions but also associated with domains other than human communication precludes the possibility ofadiscontinuousmodularlanguageorgan.ThefactthatUGappearstobemental,a propertyofthemindratherthanofthebrainasphysicalmatter,clearlyleavesopenthe

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE possibility that it is a (by)product of something else in the many brain activities, including its capacity to produce language. Anderson and Lightfoot (2002) do not addresstheseissues,althoughthebookisspecificallyonthistopic.Takingthenotion forgranted,theydecidetodefineit‘infunctionalratherthaninanatomicalterms,’asit is ‘not localized in the manner of the kidney’ (p. xiii). As a matter of fact, they sometimes identify language itself, like the ‘knowledge of language,’ as the language organ(e.g.p.8). 7 One must also note an important difference between, on the one hand, how ‘modularity’ is invoked here in reference to concurrent engagements of different parts of the brain during the production of utterances and, on the other, the way the concept is used in technology to characterize the way different parts of a complex machinejustcomplementeachother.Whilecomplementarityisalsotrueinthecaseof language, it is not evident that the brain parts are specialized for language only. For instance, Broca’s area plays a central part in coordinating sensorimotor activities that havenothingtodowithlanguage.Mirrorneurons,whichhavebeeninvokedrecently as playing a role in the reproduction of sounds, also play an important part in the reproduction of other physical activities and have been identified in other primates. The lateralization of the brain is not exclusively associated with language either. AccordingtoLieberman(2010:171),theFOXP2gene,whichwasinitiallytoohurriedly associated with language alone, also appears to facilitate ‘learning and precise motor controlinhumanandotherspecies.’ IfUGcontainsnopropertiesthatareuniquetolanguage,thenweareperhapsback totheinterestofCondillacandothereighteenth-centuryphilosophersintheevolution oflanguageasawayoflearningabouttheevolutionofmankindandtheirmind.Thus somelinguistssuchasJackendoff(2010)justifiablyobjecttofocusingonaquestionable notionoffacultyoflanguage,especially‘inthenarrowsense’(Hauseretal.2002).It impedes investigating the evolution of language in relation to that of, say, human cognitioningeneralandanimalcommunication. SeveralscholarsappeartoalignthemselveswithPinkerandBloom’s(1990)position thatanall-purposementalcapacity,orvariousphasesofitsdevelopment,ataparticu- larstage(orstages)oftheHomophylogeny,wouldhavesufficedtoproducelanguage. 8 Assuming that what emerged are individual languages but not Language per se (apositionconsistentwithSaussure’s‘laparole[...]estnécessairepourqu’unelangue s’établisse’,1962[1916]:37),analternativeinterpretationofUGisthatitisthecommon denominatorof the properties and architectures of the different languages. Thus, UG may not be a particular mental infrastructure that emerged at some particular 7 MacNeilage(2008)doubtsthatthenotionofUGisworthpositingatall.Hesuggeststhatitisa consequenceoflanguageemergenceratherthanitscause.Accordingtohim,‘thereiscurrentlyno validitytotheclaimthatUGhasaspecificgeneticbasis’(p.298,MacNeilage’sitalics). 8 HombertandLenclud(inpress)statemorespecifically:‘Thecapacityforlanguageisconsideredasa derivativecapacityanditsemergenceasthesecondaryorinducedeffectoftheemergenceofageneral cognitivecompetence.Itmayhavefollowedfromtheaptitudethatonlyhumanswouldhavebeen endowedwithtoreadandsharetheother’sintentions’(mytranslation).

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 36 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE phylogenetic stage of the Homo genus and enabled or facilitated the emergence of language,butsimplyaconsequenceofthisevolution(MacNeilage2008:298). Subscribing to the distinction between I-language and E-language, Chomsky cor- rectly dismisses the hypothesis that language emerged in the form of ‘language of thought’(LOT),citinglackoflinguisticevidenceandthefactthat‘wehavealmostno ideawhatLOTwouldbe’(2010:226,n.24).However,heassociateslanguagediversifi- cationwiththeexternalizationoflanguage.Accordingtohim,thereasonwhythereare somanylanguages‘mightbethattheproblemofexternalizationcanbesolvedinmany different and independent ways, either before or after the dispersal of the original population[outofAfrica]’(p.61). Consistent with some remarks in }1.2, one may want to justify this position by invokingtheCartesianviewthatthemindisthesameinallmembersofHomosapiens sapiens and would work the same way (allowing a limited number of alternatives) in speakingorsigning.However,thispositiondoesnotentailthattheymustofnecessity be endowed with a language-specific UG in order to accomplish this. We just do not knowyet.Ageneral-purposeproblem-solvingcognitivecapacitycanleadtothesame results, if interactants develop similar technologies for communication. UG could amount to common properties of these technologies, i.e. languages of particular communities,propertiesthataretantamounttouniversalsoflanguageandtypological variationonparticularparameters.Alternativelyconceivedofasabodyofconstraints on the architecture of language, UG can boil down to specifications of what the general-purpose problem-solving cognitive capacity permits and does not permit, bearing in mind that some of the constraints may simply be consequences of the materialsusedinthetechnology. Chomsky too speculates that the externalization ‘might have been a process of problem-solvingusingexistingcognitivecapacities’(2010:61).Thisappealingposition neednotbeweddedtohisassumptionofUG.Thosewhobelievethatmodernlanguage emerged to facilitate communication among humans can ask why I-language, associ- atedwithUG,needbeconsideredanteriortoE-language;itmayalsobeconceivedofas patternsemergingfromsuccessfulutterances,assuggestedinConstructionGrammar orbyComplexityTheory.Inotherwords,‘knowledgeoflanguage’maybeconsidered as internalizationof whatthecommunicator can(not)dovocally and/orwithmanual signs in his/her attempts to express meaning, i.e. a mental representation of the technologydevelopedbyaparticularpopulationforcommunication.Ashypothesized by Saussure (cited above), the internalization may be considered as a consequence of practice. ChomskyalsoarguesthatonlyI-languageshouldbeinthedomainofinvestigations on the evolution of language. In his own words, ‘any approach to the evolution of languagethatfocusesoncommunication,theSM[sensory–motorinterface]system,or statisticalpropertiesofspokenlanguage,andthelikemaywellbeseriouslymisguided’ (2010: 61). This position raises the issue of whether in some cases students of the evolution of language should not start by agreeing on the particular conception of languagetheyareassuming.ThisisespeciallyimportantbecauseChomsky’sreaction

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE tothequestionof‘whylanguagesappeartovarysowidely’isthatthisphenomenon‘is an illusion, much like the apparent limitless variety of organisms’ (p. 62). He is of course driven to this remark by his strong minimalist theory, which appears to treat typological variation as a linguistic epiphenomenon less important than the core of languageputativelydeterminedbyUG. CouldlanguagereallyhaveoriginatedasanabstractanduniformUG,thankstothe brain-rewiring event Chomsky hypothesizes? Or, as surmised above, is UG only the consequence of similarities among the ways members of the Homo genus have grad- uallysolvedtheircommunicativeproblems?Asremarkedabove,thisevolutionwould havebeenenabledbythesamegeneral-purposementalcapacitythatevolvedgradually inthem,andwouldhaveledthemtocoopttheiranatomicalstructurestoproducethe relevanttechnologyforcommunication,butnotnecessarilyinidenticalways. It is certainly necessary to agree on a particular definition of language, so that we maydeterminewhetherornotweseektoexplainthesamesubjectmatter.Aspointed outinMufwene(2001,2008),theSaussureanconceptionoflanguageas‘system,’which stillprevailsinlinguistics,isatoddswiththefolknotionoflanguageastheparticular wayapopulationspeaks.Infact,laypeoplespeakoflanguages,notLanguage(whichis aphilosophicalconcept);forthemalanguageisjustawayofspeaking.Itisnotevident that the earliest speculations about the origins of human communication were not about languages but about Language, hence the long-held belief among some that Hebrewwastheoriginallanguage. A problem in linguistics about what is language also arises from the status of phonetics.Itisnotobviousthatlinguistsagreeonwhetheritispartoflanguageproper or is just a modality, as suggested, for instance, by Hombert and Lenclud (in press). Thisisalegitimatequestion,assomeliketofocusonrulesandconstraintsseemingly ignoring the fact that these apply to physical items called words, which couple meanings (abstract entities) with forms. The architecture of language is built on them.ItishardtoimaginethatanygrammarattheUGleveloratthespecific-language level,sayI-language,couldexistwithoutphysicalentitiesthatitappliesto. The above considerations make it natural to investigate how typological diversity emergedbetweenlanguagesandsometimeswithinindividuallanguages.Thediversity regards, among other things, the specific phonetic inventories that different popula- tions of speakers have chosen and whether or not they made tones phonemic. It also hastodowithwhethertheychoseagglutination,polysynthesis,inflections,orisolating morphosyntax to code information around the main verb, whether the verb comes secondorinanotherpositioninthesentence,whethertheyuseNominative/Accusative or Ergative/Absolutive syntax to code agency, what strategies they use to specify reference (for instance, do they use noun classifiers or genders?), how they articulate tensedistinctions,etc.(SeeHurford2008foracomplementarydiscussion.) Although syntax has long been privileged in formal linguistics, it has by no means claimed centre stage in the scholarship on the evolution of language, despite all of Bickerton’s (1990) claims about the nature of his phylogenetic protolanguage. Very little has been written, for instance, about the evolution of combinations of words,

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 38 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE constraints on the positions of particular constituents within larger units, and move- ments of constituents to particular positions in sentences. If Chomsky is correct in claimingthattypologicalvariationisanillusion,thensomethingshouldbesaidabout howthecommonaspectsofthesesyntacticphenomenaevolved. Theabovequestionmaybemoredifficulttoanswerthanthatofwhydelimiterssuch as tense, aspect, and mood for the verb as well as number and class for the noun evolved in language. One can surmise that for communication to be more precise, or less vague, events and conditions must be situated in time and reported differently according to whether they are facts or not, and whether the referents of nouns must be specified according to cognitive requirements that interest particular populations. Itmustbeequallyinformativetofindoutwhy,forinstance,theverbalcomplementsof volitionalverbsininflectionallanguagesaremorelikelytobeusedinthesubjunctiveor infinitive.Aretheconstraintspurelylinguisticorcognitive? Ananswertothequestionofwhypredicationemerged,onethatHerderconsidered tobecentraltothestudyoftheevolutionoflanguage,canalsobeattemptedhere.We canresorttothewaythedistinctionbetweenTopic/SubjectandPredicatehasbeen traditionally explained in grammars, viz. what the utterance is about (the topic) and what state of affairs (activityor state)is associated with thetopic. However, much more is involved in predication than just having a head of the predicate phrase. The evolution of the organization of an utterance into Topic/Subject + Predicate Phrase for most languages needs some explanation, as much as the ways in which materials are structured into the predicate phrase. Would a UG-based account be satisfactory? Or would it be more informative to invoke general-purpose problem- solving cognitive capacity to explain how different populations developed their com- municativetechnologieswhichnonethelesssharesimilarprinciples?Weprobablyneed considerationsnotexclusivelygroundedinlinguistictheorytoanswerthisquestion. AspointedoutbyJackendoff(2010:69),animportantproblemwith‘syntactocentr- ism’isthatisdoesnotaccountfor‘theevolutionarysourceofthelexicon.’Questioning the centrality of syntax in generative grammar, Bolinger (1973) had argued, along with generative semanticists, that syntax was a consequence of the lexicon, being a body of generalizations from the ways that individual lexical items behave in utter- ances.Itcapturesmorphosyntacticsimilaritiesthatlexicalitemsdisplayamongthem- selves. Jackendoff (2010: 70)isalso righton themark in pointing out that Chomsky’s approachmakesithardtoexplainhowlexicalcategories(andpresumablytheensuing syntacticcategories)emerged.Weretheyarbitrarilypredetermined?Whydotheynot alloccurinalllanguagesorinidenticalways?Isitalsoanillusionthatsomelanguages have articles while others do not, or that inflectionless languages may not have a finite/nonfinite distinction for the verb, or that the infinitive may not have an identicalsyntacticstatusfromonelanguagetoanother? Ideologically germane to Chomsky’s reliance on UG but drawing very different conclusions is Derek Bickerton’s work since his book Language and Species (1990). Bickertonstartedwiththeclaimthatmodernhumanlanguageevolvedalmostabruptly from a ‘protolanguage’ used by our hominin ancestors up to Homo erectus. The

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE protolanguage putatively consisted of a (limited) vocabulary without much grammar, and may have combined both words and gestures. 9 The protolanguage ‘is not a true language, but it’s made up of languagelike elements’ (2010: 40). Its users produced ‘shortandshapelessanddisconnectedutterances,’asonemayencounterinespecially child language and incipient pidgins, which he considers to be its modern fossils (p. 40). They lack the kinds of syntactic rules and constraints one finds in a ‘true language.’ Like Slobin (2002), Mufwene (2008, 2010b) argues against this characterization of particularly pidgins and child language, products of humans endowed with Homo sapiens sapiens’s mind. Moreover, one must be cautious; the human child is not creatingalanguagebutlearningthelanguageofitssocialenvironment.Theproducers ofapidgindidnotstartfromtheabsenceofalanguage.Nordidtheirmindsregressto thestateofHomoerectus’smindwhenfacedwiththechallengeofcommunicatingwith anotherpopulationinalanguageotherthantheirownandwithoutsufficientexposure tothetargetlanguage.Ifanything,pidginstelltheextenttowhichamodernlanguage can be reduced without losing the status of a language, therefore what are the most central/essential architectural materials a language cannot do without. Assuming that languagehasevolvedgradually,theyalsotelluswhatinthearchitectureoflanguageis so deeply entrenched that it cannot be dispensed with (Wimsatt 2000). Gradual emergence assumes a lot of scaffolding (Wimsatt and Griesemer 2007), a position quite implicit in grammaticization hypotheses, in which later developments are built on earlier ones. That order of evolution would more or less determine what can be dispensed with, in a less costly manner, if the system must be reduced to an earlier functionalmodernstage.Wealsolearnthatthearchitecturalcomplexityofalanguage can be correlated with the communicative needs of its creators/users, not necessarily withthecomplexityorsophisticationoftheirmentalstructure.Pidginsareby-products ofcontactsettingswherecommunicationwasminimalandsporadic(Mufwene2008). Bickerton also hypothesizes that language must have started with labels that were iconic. Symbolic communication would evolve later, making human language more differentfromanimalmeansofcommunication.It’snotclearwhethersymbolicitems were already present in the putative protolanguage or whether they emerged in ‘true language.’IamnotsurethathisquotingTerrenceDeacon’sassumptionthat‘symbol- ism’ emerged ‘probably not until Homo erectus’ (Bickerton 2010: 50) answers the question, though he concedes to Deacon (1997) that symbolism, rather than syntax, is what distinguishes humans from animals (Bickerton 2010: 49). Symbolism enabled what Hockett (1959) identified as ‘displacement,’ the ability to talk about entities and statesofaffairsthatarenotinthehicetnuncofinteractions,andthustheabilitytotalk also about the past and the future, as much as about fictional scenarios. All human 9 Notethatsomescholars,includingCorballis(2010)andLieberman(2010),nowthinkthatmodern languagemaynothaveoriginatedbefore50,000yearsagoorso,thusmuchlaterthanHomoerectus, apparentlyduringHomosapienssapiens,andthiseventmayhavecoincidedwiththelastexodusoutof EastAfrica.(Ireturntothisbelow.)

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 40 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE populationshavedevelopedthecapacitytonarratestoriesandevenconstructmythsof allkindsthankstotheworld-creatingpoweroflanguage.Thisisnotpossibleinanimal communication, even after theyhave been taughtto communicatewithhumans.The reasonappearstolienotsomuchinourinventionofsymboliclanguageasinourbeing endowedwiththementalcapacitythatenabledusnotonlytoproduceitbutalsotodo morewithit. Ontheotherhand,Bickertonappearstocontradicthimselfinsomeways,whenhe elaboratesonthearchitectureofhis‘protolanguage’: [T]he words of protolanguage, even if vocal, could not have been divided into componentparts[i.e.sounds],andwouldlikelysoundtouslikemeaninglessgrunts orsquawks.But,liketoday’swords,eachwouldhaveafairlywell-definedrangeof meaning, and that meaning, rather than relating directly to the current situation, wouldrefertosomerelativelystableclassofobjectsorevents,regardlessofwhether ornotthesewerepresentatthescene.(2010:66) This sounds very much like symbolic communication minus phonetics and syntax. Except for symbolism, protolanguage would be a more elaborate version of primates’ callsandgestures,raisingthequestionofwhyBickertoncomparedittochildlanguage and incipient pidgins, which have human linguistic properties. These varieties have basicsyntax,variableasitmaybeinthecaseofpidgins.Inaddition,itisnotclearhow consistentheiswiththeconcessionhemakestoDeacon.Ifthelatterversionisright, reference would have started before ‘true language’ emerged, though ‘true language’ wouldrefinereferencebytheadditionofspecifierssuchasdemonstrativesandarticles, aswellaspossessiveconstructions.Thequestionofwhensuchstrategiesdevelopedis as worth investigating as that of when parts of speech emerged, and what the emer- genceentailedregardingthecomplexificationofthearchitectureofgrammar. One of Bickerton’s most problematic positions is his claim, like Condillac’s, that language emerged to enhance human capacity for thought. In addition to Chomsky’s (2010)observationthat‘wehavealmostnoideawhatLOTwouldbe’(p.226,n.24),we mustaskwhyanybodywouldneedalanguageofthoughtthatwouldslowdowntheir thinking process with the constraints of linearity? What is so more efficient about conceptual categories that are labelled linguistically when they can be identified non- linguistically,asisoftenobviouswhenspeakersdonothavewordsforideastheywant to express? Granted, human languages have a world-creating capacity; but isn’t lan- guage more for sharing conceptualizations across speakers rather than for conceiving thescenariosthatareshared? In a different vein, some linguists such as Croft (2000), Wang and Minett (2005), Mufwene(2008,2010b),Beckneretal.(2009),andLeeetal.(2009)alsonowconceiveof languagesascomplexadaptivesystems,whichpresupposenopermanentsetsofrules that guide linguistic behaviour. Instead, linguistic rules are interpreted as emergent patterns produced by self-organization, in a way similar to other natural phenomena involving complexity. This position does not remove from mankind its agency in the emergenceoflanguage;itsimplymeansthat,throughouttheHomogenusphylogeny,

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE theindividualactsofsolvingcommunicativeproblemsdidnotincludeanticipationor a plan to develop what Antoine Meillet identified as a ‘système où tout se tient’. The interactantsneverhad/haveanyforesightofwhattheircommunicative‘system’willbe likeinthefutureoronceitispresumablycompleted.Thefocusisalwaysonthehicet nuncecologicalpressuresforadequateorsuccessfulcommunication. Patterns, which linguists have identified as ‘rules,’ are therefore consequences of habits that the interactants have developed, based largely on analogies that obtained among items (Mufwene 2008), as when, in English, verbs of intention combine with verbalcomplementsinthesubjunctiveortheinfinitivebutverbsofprohibition(such aspreventanddiscourage)combinewithverbalcomplementsinthegerund,sometimes precededbytheprepositionfrom.Becausetherearecross-linguisticsimilaritiesacross languages,thoughthepatternsarenotidentical,itisinterestingintermsofevolutionto understand why such variation is the case. Thus, are there any particular cognitive pressuresthatimposeonspeakersonlythetypologicaloptionsthathavebeenattested inhumanlanguagesbutnotothers?Whywouldsuchamoodasthesubjunctive,as opposedtotheindicative,haveemerged,evenifitisnotuniversal?Whydidn’tsome other kinds of strategies develop for complements of verbs of intention and prohib- ition? Would such constraints provide evidence for Charles Darwin’s hypothesis that mental evolution drove the evolution of language rather than the other way around? This kind of question has generally not been addressed, though it arises as an issue from Bickerton (1995). He could not address it, because he assumes that language emergedtoenhancehumancapacityforthought;thereforetheconceptualinfrastruc- ture could not possibly influence how language would evolve. Is there any hope that cognitive grammar, functional grammar, construction grammar, or any other ap- proachtosyntaxthatdoesnotrelyoverlyonwhatLieberman(2006:61)calls‘theories of data’ may help us address the question adequately? Or are the approaches that assumethatlanguageisprimarilyameansofcommunicationmisguided?Inanycase, emergenceisantithetictodesign.Iftheclaimthatlanguageemergedoutofhominins’ attemptstocommunicateatvariousstagesoftheirevolutioniscorrect,thenitmaybe misguidedtocontinueusingHockett’s(1959)‘designfeatures.’ Muchofthecurrentscholarshipontheevolutionoflanguagehasbeenmoreglobal, focusing on the correlation between, on the one hand, the different stages of the evolution of the mental and anatomical structures of the Homo genus and, on the other, the apparently gradual emergence of language, especially since Homo habilis. These include but are not limited to Bickerton (1990, 1995, 2007, 2010), Lieberman (1984, 2002, 2006, 2010), Corballis (2002, 2010), MacWhinney (2002), Fitch (2002, 10 DorandJablonka(2010:140)commentonthisasfollows:‘asmoreandmoreelementscametobe canalized,andthelanguagecametoassumeacertainarchitecturallogic,thelogicgraduallyimposed systemconstraintsonwhatthenextviableinnovationwouldbe.’ThisunderscoresWimsattand Griesemer’s(2007)ideathatcurrentformsand/orstructuresprovidethescaffoldforinnovations.From thepointofviewoftheevolvingsystem,theyrefertothisextensionofthenotionas‘self-scaffolding.’

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 42 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE 2010),Tomasello(2008),Tomaselloetal.(2005),McNeill(2005),McNeilletal.(2008), MacNeilage(2008),Mufwene(2008,2010b),andHombertandLenclud(inpress).All but Bickerton argue for gradual, protracted evolution. Tomasello stresses the signifi- canceofecologicalpressuresexertedonhomininsbytheirincreasinglymorecomplex sociallives,whichrequiredmanagementbymeansofefficientandexplicitcommuni- cation.Modernlanguagewouldprovidethis,drivenbythesamemindthatwasready to handle the corresponding complex social interactions. He argues that cooperation andjointattentionplayedasimportantaroleintheemergenceoflanguageasinsocial organization. He shares with Sperber and Wilson (2002) (see also Sperber and Origi 2010)the‘theoryofmind,’whichenablesinteractantstosecond-guesseachotherand thustoinfertheintendedmeaning.Allthesefactorsenabledtheemergenceofsymbolic language, the characteristic that indeed led Deacon (1997) to identify mankind as the ‘symbolicspecies.’Asnotedabove,symboliccommunicationis,accordingtothelatter, thecharacteristicthatclearlydistinguisheshumancommunicationfromanimalcom- munication.SperberandOrigi(2010:131)conclude: Fromapragmaticperspective,itisquiteclearthatthelanguagefacultyandhuman languages, with their richness and flaws, are only adaptive in a species that is already capable of naïve psychology [i.e. mind-reading ability] and inferential communication. Corballis,MacWhinney,andMcNeillalsoarguethattheearliestancestorsofhuman language could not have been vocal. Whereas Corballis and MacWhinney originally estimated that the embryonic forms of speech may have started as early as 500,000 years ago, Corballis (2010: 115–16, 119, 123) argues that only language, using gestures, mayhavestartedthatearly,withsomecomplexgrammarforthatmatter,andthatthe contribution of Homo sapiens since about 100,000 years ago was the introduction of speech.Thismaynothaveevolvedtoitsmodernformsuntilabout30,000yearsago.To be sure, Corballis does not claim that the switch was abrupt or that no phonetic vocalizationsoccurredbeforeHomosapiens.Whathemeansisthatgesturalcommuni- cation was dominant and verbal communication did not prevail as the dominant means of communication until Homo sapiens. It still took tens of thousands of years toevolvetomodernphoneticnorms. Corballis’newpositionisechoedbyLieberman(2010:175): McCarthy,Strait,YatesandLieberman(forthcoming) found thatthenecksof the MiddlePaleolithicfossilswholivedabout100,000yearsagoweretooshorttohavea pharyngeal SVTv [vertical supralaryngeal vocal tract] that was equal in length to SVTh [horizontal SVT]. A similar constraint rules out Neanderthals having a human SVT. Surprisingly, neck lengths that would support a fully human SVT arenotapparentinthefossilrecorduntiltheUpperPaleolithic,some50,000years ago, when a blossoming of complex tools and art appears in the archeological record [...] the sudden appearance of an array of advanced artifacts has been taken to be a sign of cognitive advance. [...] The presence of a human SVT in a fossilhominidcanberegardedasanindexforthereiterativeneuralsubstratethat

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE makesvoluntaryspeechpossible.Andthatneuralsubstratealsoplaysacriticalrole inmakingsyntax,cognitiveflexibility,and,yes,dancingpossible.Speech,language, andsomedegreeofcognitiveflexibilitysurelywerepresentearlier,butthepresence ofaSVTspecializedforspeechatthecostofchokingplacesadatestamponwhen brainslikeoursdefinitelyexisted[andpresumablyonwhen,orafterwhich,modern languagesdidtoo]. McNeill’sworkcertainlyindicatesthatspeechhasnotbecometheexclusivemeansof communication to date, as it is usually complemented or supplemented by gestures. Kegletal.(1999,onNicaraguanSignLanguage),Goldin-Meadow(2003b,onhomesign language), and the rest of the literature on sign language (see Woll, Ch. 4 below) suggestalsothatmankindcouldhaveevolvedtobecomepredominantlysignersrather than speakers. It appears to me that biology-style natural selection did drive the evolution of language conceived of as the cumulative manufacture of particular com- municative technology under specific ecological pressures that favoured speech as its medium.Givón(1998,2002)citesadvantagessuchastheabilitytoworkandcommuni- cateatthesametimeandtheabilitytocommunicateinthedarkorinspiteofbarriers tovision.MacNeilage(2008)andAllan(2010a:233)alsoinvokethebroadcastcapacity ofspeech,afactorthat,accordingtoDunbar(1996),fosteredtheemergenceofspeech, asitenablesthespeakerto‘groom’(interpretedherecharitablyinthesenseof‘socialize with’) several rather than one other person at a time. 13 Broadcasting certainly widens the radius of message transmission. Corballis (2010: 122) and Mufwene (2010b: 305) invoke, in addition, the fact that speaking uses less energy, as it depends on compact articulatorsthatmoveinamuchsmallerspaceandproceedsfaster.Tobesure,signing compensatesforthisinnotbeingabsolutelylinear,thoughthesigner’shandsprobably cannotkeepupwiththespeedofanormalspeaker’sspeechorgans. These considerations are nonetheless not the full story. Signing has its advantages too.AsJohnW.Wenzel(p.c.,24Jan.2009)pointedouttome,signingisusefulwhen silence is required, such as during group hunting, or in situations where speaking wouldplacethespeakerindanger(suchasbeforeacarnivorouspredator),orwhenone isdiving.Itlooksasthoughourhomininancestorswouldhaveweighedtheprosand cons of speech vs signing as the primary technology for communication. All these [McCarthy,Strait,Yates,andLieberman(forthcoming)isstillbeingrevisedaswegotopress,and itstitleisnotyetdetermined.–Editor]TheshiftfromCorballis’(2002)andLieberman’s(2002)early conclusionaboutwhenphoneticlanguageemergedunderscoresthestrongerempiricalfoundationsof today’sspeculationsontheevolutionoflanguage.Newpaleontologicaldiscoveriesandabetter understandingtomodernhumans’neuralcircuitrywillshedmorelightonthesubjectmatter. MacNeilagearguesagainstthisperspective,citingnotonlytheassumptionthattheabilityto vocalizestartedbeforeHomohabilisbutalso‘thegreaterorganizationalsimilaritybetweenspeechand birdsongthanbetweenspeechandsignlanguage’(2008:309). 13 Bickerton(2010:28)disputesthisaccount,onthegroundsthat‘itfailstheten-wordtest,whatyou mightcallthetestofimmediateutility.’Tobesure,groomingfallsinthecategoryofecological explanation;itprovidesactuationfortheemergenceoflanguagebutsaysnothingabouthowthe emergenceoccurred.Itisundoubtedlyoneofthemanysocialreasonsandisnotmutuallyexclusivewith anyparticularaccountofhowthingsproceeded,includingBickerton’sownaccount.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 44 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE dangerous situations are not part of humans’ default mode of existence, in safe environments and interacting in dyads or triads rather than in large groups. If Tomasello(2008)isrightaboutthesignificanceofsociallifeasanecologicalpressure on the emergence of language (see also Corballis 2010: 116), then interactions in situations of no danger must have favoured the advantages that speech offers over signing, though we now know that one can express in signed language anything that canbeexpressedinspokenlanguage.Interactionsinsituationsofdangermightexplain why gestures have not been completely eliminated, especially if one factors in their tendencytobeiconic. However, Fitch (2010: 442–5) articulates more explicitly some of the counterargu- mentsdevelopedsinceHewes1996aboutthisevolution,highlightingmoreadvantages of signing over speech. Auditory attention is freed while signing, and gestures can be moreefficientwhileteachingapartnertomaketools(asidefromthefactthatactions aremoreoftenlearnedbyobservationandimitationthanfromsomebodyelse’sverbal teaching). Speech may be more energy-efficient, as it depends on articulatorsthat are smallerthanthoseinvolvedinsigning.However,asMacNeilage(2008)pointsout,the latterisnotstructuredinexactlythesameway.So,accordingtoFitch,thereisstillno convincingexplanationforwhyspeechhasprevailedasthedemographicallydominant mediumofhumanlanguage. It appears that the study of the evolution of language will be enriched by a better understanding of changing ecologies of the Homo genus, within and outside the species, during its protracted evolution. It will be informative to learn more about the role played by obvious major ecological factors such as its neural, mental, and anatomicalstructures, the evolvingsocialstructure, and allthe pressuresthey exerted ontheemergenceandevolutionoflanguage.Itiscrucialtoidentifyindividualsasthe mostdirectecologythatfilterstheexternalecologicalpressures,becausethestructures and vitality of languages are determined not by concerted behaviours of populations butratherbyaccumulationsofindividualbehaviours,whichoccurwithoutforesightof consequencesbutjusthappentoconvergetowardcertainoutcomes.(SeealsoDorand Jablonka 2010 for a related discussion.) Each communicative act is determined by particularecologicalpressurestowhichthecommunicatorrespondsinthehicetnunc oftheinteraction. Much of the recent scholarship has focused just on the emergence of speech, especially regarding the transition from ape-like holistic vocalizations to phonetic communication,andtherelationofthisaspect oftheevolutionof languagetothatof therelevantneuralcircuitryandanatomicalstructure.Thisisprobablyalsoanareathat is less abstract than syntax and semantics and easier to speculate on with more paleontologicalevidence.SpaceandtimeconstraintsforcemetofocushereonPhilip Lieberman,PeterMacNeilage,andAlisonWray,thoughmanyothersdeserveattention. MacNeilage(2008)presentsperhapsthemostextensivediscussiontodate,which,as noted above, also questions, like Lieberman (2006), the empirical justification for the notionofUGanditsrelevancetoaccountingfortheemergenceoflanguage.According to him, speech evolved in several steps, starting with the cooption for phonation of

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE organsthathadevolvedforingestion.Therhythmicpatternoftherelevantorganswas subsequentlyexapted forvocalization in CVsyllables, whichcould be reduplicated as in child language; but reduplication was abandoned for ‘syllabic variegation and (the related)restrictionsonVCco-occurrences’intheproductionofwords,as‘pressureson speech systems to expand the size of their message sets’ increased (MacNeilage 2008: 320). Eventually, longer utterances corresponding to sentences would evolve, but MacNeilage does not discuss this particular aspect of the evolution of language. However,he leaves ‘some latitude fordifferentdialectsand forindividual differences’ to have been part of the emergence process. (He does not specifically tackle the monogenesis/polygenesisissue.)AgainsttherolethatUG,hewrites: For language in particular, mirror neurons provide the foundation for a more encompassing embodiment-based neuro-cognitive alternative to UG, one that goes beyond the mechanisms that lie between meaning and sound, considered separately, by including meaning and sound in the same picture, and giving us a betterbasisfortherelationship. The embodiment perspective was primary in my attempt to say how the first wordsweremade.Isuggestedthatthephoneticstructureofthefirstwordsresulted fromthecognitivepairingofanobservedaction[...]withaconcept.(p.326) Tobe sure,MacNeilage brings uscloserto articulating Wray’s(2002) hypothesisthat the Homo genus evolved from holistic vocalizations to phonetic communication. However, it is difficult to link both scholars here, largely because they do not start from the same working assumptions. MacNeilage does not subscribe to Bickerton’s protolanguage any more than to UG. A natural bridge between them is Carstairs- McCarthy (1999), who, not unlike Jean-Jacques Rousseau, argues that Wray-style vocalizationswouldhavebeenarticulatedintosyllablesfirstandlaterintothesegments thattheseconsistof.Thisevolutionwouldhave resultedinphoneticcommunication, though,asnotedin}1.2,itraisesthequestionofwhethervowelsandconsonantsarose atthesametime,andwhether‘syllabicvariegation’startedinthewayhypothesizedby RousseauandbyMacNeilage(withCVsyllables)orinitiallyjustwithvariationinthe qualityofvowels—whichwouldraisethequestionofhowlongtheinitialpolysyllabic words consisting only of vowels could be. In the relevant passage quoted in }1.2, Rousseau suggests that the initial vocalizations consisted of vowels only, and conson- antswereinnovatedtomarksyllabicboundaries.Thefactthatinalllanguagesaround the world the vast majority of syllabic peaks consist of vowels makes these consider- ationsaninterestingquestionforstudentsoftheevolutionoflanguage. An informative complement of the above discussionon speech comes from Fitch’s (2010:}8.3)summaryofthestateoftheartabouttheevolutionandfunctionsofwhat linguists call ‘speech organs,’ which, based on the foregoing, are but exaptations of anatomical structure that evolved primarily for breathing and ingestion of food and liquids.TheiruseforspeechisaperfectillustrationofexaptationasdefinedbyGould andVrba(1982):

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 46 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE A character, previously shaped by natural selection for a particular function (an adaptation), is coopted for a new use—cooptation. (2) A character whose origin cannot be ascribed to the direct action of natural selection (a nonadaptation), iscooptedforacurrentuse—cooptation.(GouldandVrba,copiedfromWikipedia, 1Mar.2011) Fitch starts by noting, ‘Many animals open and close their jaw in the course of a call [...] and changes in lip position are almost as common’ (2010: 311). The role of the descentofthelarynxintheemergenceofspeechhasbeenexaggerated,especiallyalso in the interpretation of the feature as uniquely human. It is attested in other animals too,thoughinmanyofthemthedescentisnotpermanent.Itsroleinnon-humansisto exaggerate size, and humans too exploit this feature: ‘it is really the descent of the tongue root [...] that is the critical factor in speech production, rather than the descent of the larynx per se’ (p. 312). Fitch agrees with Lieberman et al. (1972) that ‘hominids must have had some form of speech [intended as ‘language’] before the descentofthelarynx’(p.313)—whichdoesnotmeanthattheyhadmodernlanguage. BasedonLieberman(2006,2010),discussedabove,onemustaskwhen(i.e.atwhat stage of hominin evolution) the larynx descended. According to Lieberman (1984, 2006), this otherwise maladaptive phenomenon (which puts humans at the risk of choking while ingesting) was probably a consequence of the reconfiguration of the basicranial structure after the hominins became bipedal. This says nothing about the phylogenetictimeoftheemergenceofthefeature.However,itisinformativetoknow morespecificallythatthedescentofthelarynxwasaconsequenceofthedescentofthe tongue root down the pharynx, pushing the larynx down, as happens now in human infants(Lieberman2007:46).Thisanatomicalfeaturemusthavebeenselectedbecause oftheadvantagesitconferredtothefurtherevolutionofspeechintoitsmodernform. Fitchconcludes: Notonlydoesthedescentofthelarynxenlargeourphoneticrepertoire,butitdoes so in a way that enhances speech encoding and decoding [...] and it give[s] us the point vowels [/i/, /a/, /u/] that are found in all human languages, particularly the ‘supervowel’ /i/, which plays a central role in the vocal tract normalization. (2010:315) [T]here must be functions of a descended larynx other than increased phonetic versatility[...]leavingsizeexaggerationasthemostplausibleexplanation.(p.321; Fitch’sitalics) [T]he primary evolutionary changes required for [modern] spoken language wereneural,notchangesinvocalanatomy.(p.362) ThisconclusionconfirmsDarwin’s(1871)positionthattheminddrovetheemergence andevolutionof humanlanguage,asitenabledhomininsatsuccessivestages oftheir phylogeny (mental and physical) to coopt parts of their anatomy to develop various stages of the language technology. In other words, by the increasing power of their minds, homininsandhumansgraduallydomesticated theiranatomiesto producethe communicativetechnologiescalledlanguages.Isubmitagainthatthemindisreallythe

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE mostimportantfeaturethatdistinguishesmankindfromotherprimates,andcertainly otheranimals,althoughitdoesnotfunctionidenticallyinallindividuals,notanymore thantheirphysiologiesareidentical.Languageisafterallacollectivegradualinvention (byemergence). Theimplicationsofthispositionareworthexploringfurther,sincenotwospeakers haveidenticalcompetencesinanylanguagetheyspeakand/orsign.Thisinterpretation is consistent with the notion of idiolect, whose features, as noted above, are deter- mined as much by the variation in the interaction histories of speakers/signers (Muf- wene 2008: 120, 126) as by their individual learning capacities as determined by their mentalandanatomicalsingularities(DorandJablonka2010:139). Itshouldbeobviousbynowthatstudentsoftheevolutionoflanguagedonotshare identicalworkingassumptions.Norhavetheyfocusedonthesameresearchquestions. Some have been more interested in the particular interactive dynamics that made it possibleforlanguageasacommunalphenomenontoemerge.Thisisespeciallythecase forCroft(2000,2003b,2008),Tomasello(2008),Tomaselloetal.(2005),andMufwene (2001,2005).CroftandMufwenehavepatternedtheirapproachesonbiologicalevolu- tion. Assuming an emergentist construction grammar, Croft has assumed that utter- ancesarereplicators,whichvaryacrossindividualsandareincompetition,whichis explainedbyMufwene2008asasituationinwhichthevariantsarenotequallyratedby users. The competition is resolved by selection, which can be interpreted as in biology,whenavariantprevailsoveranotherorothers,forany numberofreasonsin therelevantecology. Mufwenehasgoneasfarastoarguethatindividuallanguagesarethecounterpartsof viralspecies,withtheirorganismsbeingtheidiolectsofparticularspeakers/signers.He positsafeaturepoolinwhichthevariantsproducedbydifferentspeakers/signersare in competition and the machine that runs selection lies in the ecologies in which languages are used. The challenge is to define ecology, which has usually been understood as the social environment, withall the pressures emanating from popula- tion structure. I now think that, regarding the evolution of language,the ecology that mattersthemostliesinthedifferentevolutionarystagesofthementalandanatomical structures of the Homo genus. They determine what forms the relevant means of communicationcouldassume. Where both Croft and Mufwene hope to inspire those focusing on strictly phylo- genetictopicsandissuesisespeciallythewaytheyinvokeinnovatorsandspreaders/ copiers(conceptsalsousedbyTomasello2008andTomaselloetal.2005)toaccount fortheemergenceofnewlinguisticfeatures,whichcan,forconvenience,beexplained roughlyhereasapplyingtoformsandconstructions.Asdifferentinnovatorsneednot introduce the same features, competition arises, and various ecological factors deter- minewhichvariantswillprevailforwhichspecificfunctions,therebeingroomforfree variation too. Selection is not made consciously, but is the cumulative outcome of choices made at different times by speakers/signers in their utterances. Since most interactionsaredyadicortriadic,andsincespeakersdonotnormallyholdmeetingsto state which particular variants they prefer, the question arises of how norms emerge.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 48 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE Bothlinguistshaveattimesinvokedthe‘invisiblehand’buthavebeeninvoking‘self- organization’ in their recent works, after familiarizing themselves with complexity theory. exaptation has beenarecurrent concept inthe literature,underscoringthe (self-) scaffolding aspect of language evolution. This has been implicit in many of the discussions above, but the term has increased in currency especially regarding the emergenceofspeech(see Oudeyer2006foranextensivediscussion.)Itisalsoapplic- able to theemergence of grammar, especially inthe processcalled ‘grammaticization’ or ‘grammaticalization,’ whereby some verbs or nouns are exapted to be used as function words, such as complementizers or prepositions. Regarding the emergence ofgrammaritself,theboldestattemptistobefoundinHeineandKuteva(2007),who, inthefootstepsofHerderandMaxMüller,claimthattheinitiallanguageconsistedjust of nouns and verbs; all the other categories are derivatives from these. They do not explainhow,amongotheraspectsofgrammar,predicationanddifferentstrategiesfor specifying reference and time evolved, or under what particular ecological pressures, though they explain, on the basis of synchronic linguistic evidence, how particular markersmayhaveacquiredgrammaticalmeanings. I will conclude this selective survey of topics addressed in the past two decades on the evolutionof language with a brief discussionof the emergenceof linguistic diver- sity.Itisparticularlysignificantbecauseuniversalsandtypologicalvariationhavebeen central in linguistics since Greenberg’s (1966) landmark publication on the subject. Eventhegenerativelinguists’preoccupationwithprinciplesandparametersastheyare constrainedbyUGisaconsequenceofthepioneeringworkofGreenberg,thoughUG isnotsynonymouswithlanguageuniversals.Thequestioniscriticalespeciallybecause most of the literature has assumed or suggested monogenesis; it has typically not mentionedvariationintheprotolanguageortheearliestancestorofmodernlanguage. As a matter of fact, as noted above, Swadesh (2006 [1971]) assumed that because the original ancestor of modern language was instinctive, there could not be significant variation in it. Let’s thus focus on when speech started to emerge. Here is what Jim Hurford,oneoftheveteranstudentsoftheevolutionoflanguage,hastotellus: Summarizing the factors contributing to linguistic diversity, (1) the fact that lan- guages are learned, rather than coded into the genes, (2) the arbitrariness of the sign,and(3)theprevalenceofhorizontaltransmissionallowforgreatdiversity,but this is significantly constrained by (4) biological factors such as memory and processinglimitations,whichmayormaynotbespecifictotheLanguagedomain. (Hurford2008:251). Thesefactorsaccountmoreforidiolectalvariation,asthereisnofaithfulreplicationin language learning (Lass 1997), than for the emergence of typological variation across languages. If populations can choose to build their languages on different words and only on overlapping phonetic inventories, what should keep them from developing different combination patterns of these units into larger utterances and therefore differentgrammars?Ifweinterpretphonologyasthegrammarofsoundsandassume

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE that grammars are consequences of the ways units are combined together and struc- tured into larger and larger (hierarchical) units, why should we expect the relevant hominin/humanpopulationsatthedifferentstagesoftheevolutionoflanguagetohave doneexactlythesamething? Afterall,thepaleontologicalevidencedoesnotsuggest thatHomosapienssapiensdispersedtotheworldoutofonevillageinAfrica;hominin fossilshavebeenfoundinavastareaofEast(andSouth)Africa.Shouldn’titbenormal to assume that, having reached the same stage of mental and anatomical evolution, hominin populations developed languages that were comparable but not identical in their architectures? They did not have to package information in identical ways, no morethantheydevelopedidenticalcultures. Another dimension of the scholarship on the evolution of language today lies in computer modelling, which I will not discuss here, due to lack of space. The rewards dependlargelyontheassumptionsthatunderliethemodels.Whentheyareempirically grounded,theybecomeimportantresearchtools,suchaswhenusedbyPhilipLieber- manandhisassociatestodeterminewhethertheNeanderthalwascapableofspeaking. When accurately informed and well designed, modelling can help empirical research reformulatesomeofitsquestionsaboutadistantpastthatcannotberecreated.(Seee.g. Oudeyer2006onself-organizationintheemergenceoflanguageandSteels2011onthe emergenceofcommunalnorms.) Last but not least, there is all the research on animal communication, especially intraspecifically among non-human primates and between humans and some great apes.Itisexpectedtoinformresearchontheevolutionoflanguageinsofarasscholars canidentifybothbehavioursthatmayhavebeeninheritedfromourcommonancestors millions of years ago and later homologousevolutions from features shared earlier in our common phylogenetic ancestry. Unfortunately, I can do even less justice to this topicherethantothosediscussedabove.ComparisonsbyTomasello(2008)regarding jointattentionandcooperationhighlightthesignificantrolewhichthesesocialfactors thatwedonotsharewiththeotherprimatesplayedinthephylogeneticemergenceof human language. Fitch’s and Lieberman’s comparisons regarding primates’ supralar- yngeal vocal structures also reveal important differences that rule out the possibility thattheywouldhavedevelopedhuman-likespeecheveniftheywereendowedwiththe same kind of mind as we have. On the other hand, discoveries that non-human primates share with us mirror neurons, the FOXP2 gene, and some of the specialized functionsassociatedwithBroca’sareasuggestthatthehumanmindhadagreaterrole to play in the emergence of language than may have been assumed before, which is precisely why our phylogenetic cousins have not even developed some symbolic-iconic systemsimilartosignlanguage.Languagemaybeamoreculturalphenomenonthansome ofushaveassumed.Isubmitthatlanguageisindeedoneofthefacetsofhumanculture, Aconvenientnonlinguisticillustrationofthismaybefoundinhowengineersusingsimilar algorithmsconstrainedbythesameprinciplesproducetechnologies(suchascomputersandderivative products)thatarenotidenticalintheirarchitecturesandfunctionalities.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 50 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE and that both linguists and anthropologists may have been misguided in speaking of languageand/incultureasiftheywereopposedtoeachotheronthesameplane. On the other hand, there is a growing literature suggesting that differences between animalsandhumansaremoreamatterofdegreethandichotomy.Someofthecapacities having to do with mirror neurons and mind-reading are very similar, which raises the question of whether human intelligence is not a consequence of the particular ways variouspartsofthebrainsandmodulesofthemindinteract. Ithaslongbeenassumedthatanimalmeansofcommunicationareinnatebutthatof humansarenot.However,ithasalsobecomeevidentthatacertainamountoflearning is involved in, for instance, bird songs (Margoliash 2010). Past the critical period, the birddoesnotdeveloptherightsongforitscon-specifics!Besides,somebirdsexposed toalter-specifics’songsacquireitratherthanthatoftheircon-specifics.Thisandother factors raise the question of whether there is such a thing as language or cultural ‘transmission,’ analogous to gene transmission in biology, especially among humans. Unliketransmission,which,intheabsenceofmutations,guaranteesfaithfulmainten- anceofinheritedtraits,learningbyinferencealmostensuresmodificationofthetarget features, which is more consistent with language ‘acquisition,’ interpreted as system reconstruction(Mufwene2001,2008).Studentsofculturalevolution,suchasRicherson andBoyd(2005),Mithen(2005),andMesoudietal.(2004),havekeptupimpressively with the scholarship on language evolution. We have everything to learn in reading themtoo. Someofthemorepopular studiesofanimalcommunicationhavefocusedonwhat canbelearnedfromteachinghumanlanguageoranartificialsystemmadebyhumans toprimates(e.g.Segerdahletal.2005).Itappearsthatlexigramsconstituteaseriously impoverishedsystemthat doesnotgo beyondthetelegraphicstage in childlanguage. Although great apes such as Kanzi have been credited with the ability to understand humanspeech,itisnotobviousthattheycanfollowanarrativethewayahumanchild can. This highlights mental differences between non-human primates and us, though differencesinmentalcapacitiesarealsoamatterofdegree.Nonetheless,itappearsthat the less than 2 per cent genetic differences between chimpanzees and humans have entailedexponentialcultural,andmorespecificallylanguage-related,differences. Theoverallapproachhasassumedthathumansaremoreevolvedthannon-human primates, rather than just being different from them. We have not yet accounted for whywecannotlearntocommunicatethewaytheydo! Answerstothisquestionmay equally well inform us about how different our minds really are from theirs or, more accurately, about how communication in all species is jointly constrained by their respective mental and anatomical ecologies. We have discussed culture as if it were peculiar to humans, whereas it can be interpreted as customary ways in which members of a particular population behave and do things. Cultural differences can alsoinformusabouthowdifferentsocialstructureshaveinfluencedwhatneedstobe communicatedandwhatkindsofsystemsareneededtoconveytherelevantpiecesof information.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi THE ORIGINS AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE . C : O C ONCLUSIONS LDER VS URRENT A E L PPROACHES TO THE VOLUTION OF ANGUAGE AsaptlyexpressedbyFitch(2010:389), regardinglanguageevolution,thereareveryfewnewhypothesesunderthesun,and current debates can and should pick up where our scholarly predecessors left off. [...T]herearerealinsightsintheolderliteraturewhichremainunappreciated. HombertandLenclud(inpress)notelikewisethatanumberofthepositionsassumed today were already defended by philosophers of the eighteenth century. For instance, theclaimthatlanguageiswhatdistinguishesmankindthemostclearlyfromtheanimal kingdom is already evident in Condillac. It is also hard to sharply distinguish eight- eenth-centuryargumentsfortheemergenceofhumanlanguageoutofinstinctivecries and gestures from Bickerton’s position that the predecessor of his ‘protolanguage’ consistedofholisticvocalizationsandgestures.Theideaofgradualismintheevolution oflanguageisnotneweither;andRousseauhadalreadyarticulatedthesignificanceof socialinteractionsasaprerequisitetotheemergenceoflanguage.Andonecankeepon identifying a number of current hypotheses which are hardly different from earlier speculationsonthesubject. Animportantdifferencebetweenusandthosephilosophersandphilologistsbefore thenineteenthcentury,andinsomecasesuptothen,isthatwenolongerassumethat our hominin ancestors up to 200,000–100,000 years ago were just like us, except that theywereeithercreatedbyGodorjusthappenedtoinhabitourplanetlongbeforewe did, or just were mentally inferior to us. We now approach the subject taking into account what communicative architecture would have been possible at various stages of hominin evolution. We ask: since Homo habilis was anatomically different from Homoerectus,whatkindoflanguagewouldthoseremoteancestorsofourshavebeen capableofdevelopingeveniftheywereequippedwiththesamekindofmentalcapacity asus?ThesameappliestoHomoerectusandarchaicHomosapiens.Asimilarquestion arisesregardingthecomplexityofutterancesrelativetothecomplexityofthehominin mindand/orsocialorganization.Whatkindsofecologicalpressuresdidtheyexercise on the evolution of language? Lieberman (1984), Bickerton (1990), Tomasello (2008), Corballis (2002, 2010), MacNeilage (2008), and Fitch (2010) are good illustrations of thisecologicalapproach,althoughtheydonotdrawidenticalconclusions. Another important difference between us and philosophers and philologists before the nineteenth century is that, better than Socrates in Plato’s Cratylus, we are more 15 Asamatteroffact,Bickerton(2010)nowdiscussestheevolutionoflanguagefromthepointof viewof‘nicheconstruction,’whichLaland(2007:35)characterizesas‘theprocesswherebyorganisms, throughtheirmetabolism,theiractivities,andtheirchoices,modify[their]niches.’(Seealso Odling-Smeeetal.2003foramoreelaboratediscussion.)ThesubtitleofBickerton(2010)captures theideaadequately:HowHumansMadeLanguage,HowLanguageMadeHumans.

OUPUNCORRECTEDPROOF–REVISES,13/12/2012,SPi 52 SALIKOKO S. MUFWENE aware of the speculative nature of our hypotheses in this research area. With few exceptions, scholars have generally been more critical and more cautious, revealing moreawarenessofthelimitationsofthestateoftheart. Whetherornotweacknowledgeit,CharlesDarwinhasalsoexercisedalong-lasting impact on us: most scholars today do not assume that language was God-given (presuming creationists to be in the minority). Even Chomsky’s account that UG emerged by some rewiring of the brain is a Darwinian explanation, because Darwin madeallowanceformutations,andUGcouldhaveemergedonlyataparticularstageof hominin evolution, quite late. Besides, mutations are probably also the best explan- ationsfromallthechangesinhomininevolution,withthemutantsprevailingandthe restevolvingasconsequencesofthosemutations. Wealsonowthinkofthearchitectureoflanguagesasmodular.Thisisanideathat does not appear in the earlier literature. It also frees scholars from having to assume thateverycomponentofmodernlanguagemusthaveevolvedatthesametimeasthe others.Nordowehavetoassumethattheanatomicalandmentalstructuresthatwere cooptedintheapparentlygradualemergenceoflanguageallevolvedatthesametime. Even in assuming that the mind domesticated hominin and human anatomy for the production of language, it need not have coopted the different organs concurrently. This is the kind of evolution suggested by the paleontological evidence that experts have adduced,leadingbothMichaelCorballisandPhilip Liebermanto nowconclude that speech-dominated communication must have emerged more recently, 50,000– 30,000yearsago,not500,000yearsago.ThisthinkingisconsistentwithHombertand Lenclud’s (in press) conclusion that the capacity for language is a derivative and consequenceofhominins’/humans’evolvingcognitivecapacity. It is more and more evident that the subject matter of the evolution of language is multifaceted,havingtodowiththemechanical/architecturalaspectsoflanguage,with the particular anatomical organs coopted for its production and perception, with the mental aspects of the technology (including the formation of concepts and their combinations into larger chunks), and with the apparently social motivation for producing the technology. It would be difficult, if not impossible, to explain how modern humans’ linguistic communication got where it is now without answering variousquestionsthatpertaintothesedifferentfacetsofthesubjectmatter.Itispartof understanding how the Homo genus has evolved over the past two or three million yearsbiologically,anatomically,mentally,andsocially.

